THE SNOW QUEEN

A TALE IN SEVEN STORIES


FIRST STORY

WHICH DEALS WITH A MIRROR AND ITS FRAGMENTS

[Illustration: _One day he was in a high state of delight because he had
invented a mirror with this peculiarity, that every good and pretty
thing reflected in it shrank away to almost nothing._]

Now we are about to begin, and you must attend; and when we get to the
end of the story, you will know more than you do now about a very wicked
hobgoblin. He was one of the worst kind; in fact he was a real demon.
One day he was in a high state of delight because he had invented a
mirror with this peculiarity, that every good and pretty thing reflected
in it shrank away to almost nothing. On the other hand, every bad and
good-for-nothing thing stood out and looked its worst. The most
beautiful landscapes reflected in it looked like boiled spinach, and the
best people became hideous, or else they were upside down and had no
bodies. Their faces were distorted beyond recognition, and if they had
even one freckle it appeared to spread all over the nose and mouth. The
demon thought this immensely amusing. If a good thought passed through
any one's mind, it turned to a grin in the mirror, and this caused real
delight to the demon. All the scholars in the demon's school, for he
kept a school, reported that a miracle had taken place: now for the
first time it had become possible to see what the world and mankind were
really like. They ran about all over with the mirror, till at last there
was not a country or a person which had not been seen in this distorting
mirror. They even wanted to fly up to heaven with it to mock the angels;
but the higher they flew, the more it grinned, so much so that they
could hardly hold it, and at last it slipped out of their hands and fell
to the earth, shivered into hundreds of millions and billions of bits.
Even then it did more harm than ever. Some of these bits were not as big
as a grain of sand, and these flew about all over the world, getting
into people's eyes, and, once in, they stuck there, and distorted
everything they looked at, or made them see everything that was amiss.
Each tiniest grain of glass kept the same power as that possessed by the
whole mirror. Some people even got a bit of the glass into their hearts,
and that was terrible, for the heart became like a lump of ice. Some of
the fragments were so big that they were used for window panes, but it
was not advisable to look at one's friends through these panes. Other
bits were made into spectacles, and it was a bad business when people
put on these spectacles meaning to be just. The bad demon laughed
till he split his sides; it tickled him to see the mischief he had done.
But some of these fragments were still left floating about the world,
and you shall hear what happened to them.


SECOND STORY

ABOUT A LITTLE BOY AND A LITTLE GIRL

[Illustration: _Many a winter's night she flies through the streets and
peeps in at the windows, and then the ice freezes on the panes into
wonderful patterns like flowers._]

In a big town crowded with houses and people, where there is no room for
gardens, people have to be content with flowers in pots instead. In one
of these towns lived two children who managed to have something bigger
than a flower pot for a garden. They were not brother and sister, but
they were just as fond of each other as if they had been. Their parents
lived opposite each other in two attic rooms. The roof of one house just
touched the roof of the next one, with only a rain-water gutter between
them. They each had a little dormer window, and one only had to step
over the gutter to get from one house to the other. Each of the parents
had a large window-box, in which they grew pot herbs and a little
rose-tree. There was one in each box, and they both grew splendidly.
Then it occurred to the parents to put the boxes across the gutter, from
house to house, and they looked just like two banks of flowers. The pea
vines hung down over the edges of the boxes, and the roses threw out
long creepers which twined round the windows. It was almost like a green
triumphal arch. The boxes were high, and the children knew they must not
climb up on to them, but they were often allowed to have their little
stools out under the rose-trees, and there they had delightful games. Of
course in the winter there was an end to these amusements. The windows
were often covered with hoar-frost; then they would warm coppers on the
stove and stick them on the frozen panes, where they made lovely
peep-holes, as round as possible. Then a bright eye would peep through
these holes, one from each window. The little boy's name was Kay, and
the little girl's Gerda.

In the summer they could reach each other with one bound, but in the
winter they had to go down all the stairs in one house and up all the
stairs in the other, and outside there were snowdrifts.

'Look! the white bees are swarming,' said the old grandmother.

'Have they a queen bee, too?' asked the little boy, for he knew that
there was a queen among the real bees.

'Yes, indeed they have,' said the grandmother. 'She flies where the
swarm is thickest. She is biggest of them all, and she never remains on
the ground. She always flies up again to the sky. Many a winter's night
she flies through the streets and peeps in at the windows, and then the
ice freezes on the panes into wonderful patterns like flowers.'

'Oh yes, we have seen that,' said both children, and then they knew
it was true.

'Can the Snow Queen come in here?' asked the little girl.

'Just let her come,' said the boy, 'and I will put her on the stove,
where she will melt.'

But the grandmother smoothed his hair and told him more stories.

In the evening when little Kay was at home and half undressed, he crept
up on to the chair by the window, and peeped out of the little hole. A
few snow-flakes were falling, and one of these, the biggest, remained on
the edge of the window-box. It grew bigger and bigger, till it became
the figure of a woman, dressed in the finest white gauze, which appeared
to be made of millions of starry flakes. She was delicately lovely, but
all ice, glittering, dazzling ice. Still she was alive, her eyes shone
like two bright stars, but there was no rest or peace in them. She
nodded to the window and waved her hand. The little boy was frightened
and jumped down off the chair, and then he fancied that a big bird flew
past the window.

The next day was bright and frosty, and then came the thaw--and after
that the spring. The sun shone, green buds began to appear, the swallows
built their nests, and people began to open their windows. The little
children began to play in their garden on the roof again. The roses were
in splendid bloom that summer; the little girl had learnt a hymn, and
there was something in it about roses, and that made her think of her
own. She sang it to the little boy, and then he sang it with her--

    'Where roses deck the flowery vale,
    There, Infant Jesus, we thee hail!'

The children took each other by the hands, kissed the roses, and
rejoiced in God's bright sunshine, and spoke to it as if the Child Jesus
were there. What lovely summer days they were, and how delightful it was
to sit out under the fresh rose-trees, which seemed never tired of
blooming.

Kay and Gerda were looking at a picture book of birds and animals one
day--it had just struck five by the church clock--when Kay said, 'Oh,
something struck my heart, and I have got something in my eye!'

The little girl put her arms round his neck, he blinked his eye; there
was nothing to be seen.

'I believe it is gone,' he said; but it was not gone. It was one of
those very grains of glass from the mirror, the magic mirror. You
remember that horrid mirror, in which all good and great things
reflected in it became small and mean, while the bad things were
magnified, and every flaw became very apparent.

Poor Kay! a grain of it had gone straight to his heart, and would soon
turn it to a lump of ice. He did not feel it any more, but it was still
there.

'Why do you cry?' he asked; 'it makes you look ugly; there's nothing the
matter with me. How horrid!' he suddenly cried; 'there's a worm in that
rose, and that one is quite crooked; after all, they are nasty roses,
and so are the boxes they are growing in!' He kicked the box and broke
off two of the roses.

'What are you doing, Kay?' cried the little girl. When he saw her alarm,
he broke off another rose, and then ran in by his own window, and left
dear little Gerda alone.

When she next got out the picture book he said it was only fit for
babies in long clothes. When his grandmother told them stories he always
had a but--, and if he could manage it, he liked to get behind her
chair, put on her spectacles and imitate her. He did it very well and
people laughed at him. He was soon able to imitate every one in the
street; he could make fun of all their peculiarities and failings. 'He
will turn out a clever fellow,' said people. But it was all that bit of
glass in his heart, that bit of glass in his eye, and it made him tease
little Gerda who was so devoted to him. He played quite different games
now; he seemed to have grown older. One winter's day, when the snow was
falling fast, he brought in a big magnifying glass; he held out the tail
of his blue coat, and let the snow flakes fall upon it.

'Now look through the glass, Gerda!' he said; every snowflake was
magnified, and looked like a lovely flower, or a sharply pointed star.

'Do you see how cleverly they are made?' said Kay. 'Much more
interesting than looking at real flowers. And there is not a single flaw
in them; they are perfect, if only they would not melt.'

Shortly after, he appeared in his thick gloves, with his sledge on his
back. He shouted right into Gerda's ear, 'I have got leave to drive in
the big square where the other boys play!' and away he went.

In the big square the bolder boys used to tie their little sledges to
the farm carts and go a long way in this fashion. They had no end of fun
over it. Just in the middle of their games a big sledge came along; it
was painted white, and the occupant wore a white fur coat and cap. The
sledge drove twice round the square, and Kay quickly tied his sledge on
behind. Then off they went, faster, and faster, into the next street.
The driver turned round and nodded to Kay in the most friendly way, just
as if they knew each other. Every time Kay wanted to loose his sledge
the person nodded again, and Kay stayed where he was, and they drove
right out through the town gates. Then the snow began to fall so heavily
that the little boy could not see a hand before him as they rushed
along. He undid the cords and tried to get away from the big sledge, but
it was no use, his little sledge stuck fast, and on they rushed, faster
than the wind. He shouted aloud, but nobody heard him, and the sledge
tore on through the snow-drifts. Every now and then it gave a bound, as
if they were jumping over hedges and ditches. He was very frightened,
and he wanted to say his prayers, but he could only remember the
multiplication tables.

The snow-flakes grew bigger and bigger, till at last they looked like
big white chickens. All at once they sprang on one side, the big sledge
stopped and the person who drove got up, coat and cap smothered in snow.
It was a tall and upright lady all shining white, the Snow Queen
herself.

'We have come along at a good pace,' she said; 'but it's cold enough to
kill one; creep inside my bearskin coat.'

She took him into the sledge by her, wrapped him in her furs, and he
felt as if he were sinking into a snowdrift.

'Are you still cold?' she asked, and she kissed him on the forehead.
Ugh! it was colder than ice, it went to his very heart, which was
already more than half ice; he felt as if he were dying, but only for a
moment, and then it seemed to have done him good; he no longer felt the
cold.

'My sledge! don't forget my sledge!' He only remembered it now; it was
tied to one of the white chickens which flew along behind them. The Snow
Queen kissed Kay again, and then he forgot all about little Gerda,
Grandmother, and all the others at home.

'Now I mustn't kiss you any more,' she said, 'or I should kiss you to
death!'

Kay looked at her, she was so pretty; a cleverer, more beautiful face
could hardly be imagined. She did not seem to be made of ice now, as she
was outside the window when she waved her hand to him. In his eyes she
was quite perfect, and he was not a bit afraid of her; he told her that
he could do mental arithmetic, as far as fractions, and that he knew the
number of square miles and the number of inhabitants of the country. She
always smiled at him, and he then thought that he surely did not know
enough, and he looked up into the wide expanse of heaven, into which
they rose higher and higher as she flew with him on a dark cloud, while
the storm surged around them, the wind ringing in their ears like
well-known old songs.

They flew over woods and lakes, over oceans and islands; the cold wind
whistled down below them, the wolves howled, the black crows flew
screaming over the sparkling snow, but up above, the moon shone bright
and clear--and Kay looked at it all the long, long winter nights; in the
day he slept at the Snow Queen's feet.


STORY THREE

THE GARDEN OF THE WOMAN LEARNED IN MAGIC

[Illustration: _Then an old, old woman came out of the house; she was
leaning upon a big, hooked stick, and she wore a big sun hat, which was
covered with beautiful painted flowers._]

But how was little Gerda getting on all this long time since Kay left
her? Where could he be? Nobody knew, nobody could say anything about
him. All that the other boys knew was, that they had seen him tie his
little sledge to a splendid big one which drove away down the street and
out of the town gates. Nobody knew where he was, and many tears were
shed; little Gerda cried long and bitterly. At last, people said he was
dead; he must have fallen into the river which ran close by the town.
Oh, what long, dark, winter days those were!

At last the spring came and the sunshine.

'Kay is dead and gone,' said little Gerda.

'I don't believe it,' said the sunshine.

'He is dead and gone,' she said to the swallows.

'We don't believe it,' said the swallows; and at last little Gerda did
not believe it either.

'I will put on my new red shoes,' she said one morning; 'those Kay never
saw; and then I will go down to the river and ask it about him!'

It was very early in the morning; she kissed the old grandmother, who
was still asleep, put on the red shoes, and went quite alone, out by the
gate to the river.

'Is it true that you have taken my little playfellow? I will give you my
red shoes if you will bring him back to me again.'

She thought the little ripples nodded in such a curious way, so she took
off her red shoes, her most cherished possessions, and threw them both
into the river. They fell close by the shore, and were carried straight
back to her by the little wavelets; it seemed as if the river would not
accept her offering, as it had not taken little Kay.

She only thought she had not thrown them far enough; so she climbed into
a boat which lay among the rushes, then she went right out to the
further end of it, and threw the shoes into the water again. But the
boat was loose, and her movements started it off, and it floated away
from the shore: she felt it moving and tried to get out, but before she
reached the other end the boat was more than a yard from the shore, and
was floating away quite quickly.

Little Gerda was terribly frightened, and began to cry, but nobody heard
her except the sparrows, and they could not carry her ashore, but they
flew alongside twittering, as if to cheer her, 'We are here, we are
here.' The boat floated rapidly away with the current; little Gerda sat
quite still with only her stockings on; her little red shoes floated
behind, but they could not catch up the boat, which drifted away faster
and faster.

The banks on both sides were very pretty with beautiful flowers, fine
old trees, and slopes dotted with sheep and cattle, but not a single
person.

'Perhaps the river is taking me to little Kay,' thought Gerda, and that
cheered her; she sat up and looked at the beautiful green banks for
hours.

Then they came to a big cherry garden; there was a little house in
it, with curious blue and red windows, it had a thatched roof, and two
wooden soldiers stood outside, who presented arms as she sailed past.
Gerda called out to them; she thought they were alive, but of course
they did not answer; she was quite close to them, for the current drove
the boat close to the bank. Gerda called out again, louder than before,
and then an old, old woman came out of the house; she was leaning upon a
big, hooked stick, and she wore a big sun hat, which was covered with
beautiful painted flowers.

'You poor little child,' said the old woman, 'how ever were you driven
out on this big, strong river into the wide, wide world alone?' Then she
walked right into the water, and caught hold of the boat with her hooked
stick; she drew it ashore, and lifted little Gerda out.

Gerda was delighted to be on dry land again, but she was a little bit
frightened of the strange old woman.

'Come, tell me who you are, and how you got here,' said she.

When Gerda had told her the whole story and asked her if she had seen
Kay, the woman said she had not seen him, but that she expected him.
Gerda must not be sad, she was to come and taste her cherries and see
her flowers, which were more beautiful than any picture-book; each one
had a story to tell. Then she took Gerda by the hand, they went into the
little house, and the old woman locked the door.

The windows were very high up, and they were red, blue, and yellow;
they threw a very curious light into the room. On the table were
quantities of the most delicious cherries, of which Gerda had leave to
eat as many as ever she liked. While she was eating, the old woman
combed her hair with a golden comb, so that the hair curled, and shone
like gold round the pretty little face, which was as sweet as a rose.

'I have long wanted a little girl like you!' said the old woman. 'You
will see how well we shall get on together.' While she combed her hair
Gerda had forgotten all about Kay, for the old woman was learned in the
magic art; but she was not a bad witch, she only cast spells over people
for a little amusement, and she wanted to keep Gerda. She therefore went
into the garden and waved her hooked stick over all the rose-bushes, and
however beautifully they were flowering, all sank down into the rich
black earth without leaving a trace behind them. The old woman was
afraid that if Gerda saw the roses she would be reminded of Kay, and
would want to run away. Then she took Gerda into the flower garden. What
a delicious scent there was! and every imaginable flower for every
season was in that lovely garden; no picture-book could be brighter or
more beautiful. Gerda jumped for joy and played till the sun went down
behind the tall cherry trees. Then she was put into a lovely bed with
rose-coloured silken coverings stuffed with violets; she slept and
dreamt as lovely dreams as any queen on her wedding day.

The next day she played with the flowers in the garden again--and many
days passed in the same way. Gerda knew every flower, but however many
there were, she always thought there was one missing, but which it was
she did not know.

One day she was sitting looking at the old woman's sun hat with its
painted flowers, and the very prettiest one of them all was a rose. The
old woman had forgotten her hat when she charmed the others away. This
is the consequence of being absent-minded.

'What!' said Gerda, 'are there no roses here?' and she sprang in among
the flower-beds and sought, but in vain! Her hot tears fell on the very
places where the roses used to be; when the warm drops moistened the
earth the rose-trees shot up again, just as full of bloom as when they
sank. Gerda embraced the roses and kissed them, and then she thought of
the lovely roses at home, and this brought the thought of little Kay.

'Oh, how I have been delayed,' said the little girl, 'I ought to have
been looking for Kay! Don't you know where he is?' she asked the roses.
'Do you think he is dead and gone?'

'He is not dead,' said the roses. 'For we have been down underground,
you know, and all the dead people are there, but Kay is not among them.'

'Oh, thank you!' said little Gerda, and then she went to the other
flowers and looked into their cups and said, 'Do you know where Kay is?'

But each flower stood in the sun and dreamt its own dreams. Little Gerda
heard many of these, but never anything about Kay.

And what said the Tiger lilies?

'Do you hear the drum? rub-a-dub, it has only two notes, rub-a-dub,
always the same. The wailing of women and the cry of the preacher. The
Hindu woman in her long red garment stands on the pile, while the flames
surround her and her dead husband. But the woman is only thinking of the
living man in the circle round, whose eyes burn with a fiercer fire than
that of the flames which consume the body. Do the flames of the heart
die in the fire?'

'I understand nothing about that,' said little Gerda.

'That is my story,' said the Tiger lily.

'What does the convolvulus say?'

'An old castle is perched high over a narrow mountain path, it is
closely covered with ivy, almost hiding the old red walls, and creeping
up leaf upon leaf right round the balcony where stands a beautiful
maiden. She bends over the balustrade and looks eagerly up the road. No
rose on its stem is fresher than she; no apple blossom wafted by the
wind moves more lightly. Her silken robes rustle softly as she bends
over and says, 'Will he never come?''

'Is it Kay you mean?' asked Gerda.

'I am only talking about my own story, my dream,' answered the
convolvulus.

What said the little snowdrop?

'Between two trees a rope with a board is hanging; it is a swing. Two
pretty little girls in snowy frocks and green ribbons fluttering on
their hats are seated on it. Their brother, who is bigger than they are,
stands up behind them; he has his arms round the ropes for supports, and
holds in one hand a little bowl and in the other a clay pipe. He is
blowing soap-bubbles. As the swing moves the bubbles fly upwards in all
their changing colours, the last one still hangs from the pipe swayed by
the wind, and the swing goes on. A little black dog runs up, he is
almost as light as the bubbles, he stands up on his hind legs and wants
to be taken into the swing, but it does not stop. The little dog falls
with an angry bark; they jeer at it; the bubble bursts. A swinging
plank, a fluttering foam picture--that is my story!'

'I daresay what you tell me is very pretty, but you speak so sadly and
you never mention little Kay.'

What says the hyacinth?

'They were three beautiful sisters, all most delicate, and quite
transparent. One wore a crimson robe, the other a blue, and the third
was pure white. These three danced hand-in-hand, by the edge of the lake
in the moonlight. They were human beings, not fairies of the wood. The
fragrant air attracted them, and they vanished into the wood; here the
fragrance was stronger still. Three coffins glide out of the wood
towards the lake, and in them lie the maidens. The fire-flies flutter
lightly round them with their little flickering torches. Do these
dancing maidens sleep, or are they dead? The scent of the flower says
that they are corpses. The evening bell tolls their knell.'

'You make me quite sad,' said little Gerda; 'your perfume is so strong
it makes me think of those dead maidens. Oh, is little Kay really dead?
The roses have been down underground, and they say no.'

'Ding, dong,' tolled the hyacinth bells; 'we are not tolling for little
Kay; we know nothing about him. We sing our song, the only one we know.'

And Gerda went on to the buttercups shining among their dark green
leaves.

'You are a bright little sun,' said Gerda. 'Tell me if you know where I
shall find my playfellow.'

The buttercup shone brightly and returned Gerda's glance. What song
could the buttercup sing? It would not be about Kay.

'God's bright sun shone into a little court on the first day of spring.
The sunbeams stole down the neighbouring white wall, close to which
bloomed the first yellow flower of the season; it shone like burnished
gold in the sun. An old woman had brought her arm-chair out into the
sun; her granddaughter, a poor and pretty little maid-servant, had come
to pay her a short visit, and she kissed her. There was gold, heart's
gold, in the kiss. Gold on the lips, gold on the ground, and gold above,
in the early morning beams! Now that is my little story,' said the
buttercup.

'Oh, my poor old grandmother!' sighed Gerda. 'She will be longing to see
me, and grieving about me, as she did about Kay. But I shall soon go
home again and take Kay with me. It is useless for me to ask the flowers
about him. They only know their own stories, and have no information to
give me.'

Then she tucked up her little dress, so that she might run the faster;
but the narcissus blossoms struck her on the legs as she jumped over
them, so she stopped and said, 'Perhaps you can tell me something.'

She stooped down close to the flower and listened. What did it say?

'I can see myself, I can see myself,' said the narcissus. 'Oh, how sweet
is my scent. Up there in an attic window stands a little dancing girl
half dressed; first she stands on one leg, then on the other, and looks
as if she would tread the whole world under her feet. She is only a
delusion. She pours some water out of a teapot on to a bit of stuff that
she is holding; it is her bodice. "Cleanliness is a good thing," she
says. Her white dress hangs on a peg; it has been washed in the teapot,
too, and dried on the roof. She puts it on, and wraps a saffron-coloured
scarf round her neck, which makes the dress look whiter. See how high
she carries her head, and all upon one stem. I see myself, I see
myself!'

'I don't care a bit about all that,' said Gerda; 'it's no use telling me
such stuff.'

And then she ran to the end of the garden. The door was fastened, but
she pressed the rusty latch, and it gave way. The door sprang open, and
little Gerda ran out with bare feet into the wide world. She looked back
three times, but nobody came after her. At last she could run no
further, and she sat down on a big stone. When she looked round she saw
that the summer was over; it was quite late autumn. She would never have
known it inside the beautiful garden, where the sun always shone, and
the flowers of every season were always in bloom.

'Oh, how I have wasted my time,' said little Gerda. 'It is autumn. I
must not rest any longer,' and she got up to go on.

Oh, how weary and sore were her little feet, and everything round looked
so cold and dreary. The long willow leaves were quite yellow. The damp
mist fell off the trees like rain, one leaf dropped after another from
the trees, and only the sloe-thorn still bore its fruit; but the sloes
were sour and set one's teeth on edge. Oh, how grey and sad it looked,
out in the wide world.


FOURTH STORY

PRINCE AND PRINCESS

[Illustration: _She has read all the newspapers in the world, and
forgotten them again, so clever is she._]

Gerda was soon obliged to rest again. A big crow hopped on to the snow,
just in front of her. It had been sitting looking at her for a long time
and wagging its head. Now it said, 'Caw, caw; good-day, good-day,' as
well as it could; it meant to be kind to the little girl, and asked her
where she was going, alone in the wide world.

Gerda understood the word 'alone' and knew how much there was in it, and
she told the crow the whole story of her life and adventures, and asked
if it had seen Kay.

The crow nodded its head gravely and said, 'May be I have, may be I
have.'

'What, do you really think you have?' cried the little girl, nearly
smothering him with her kisses.

'Gently, gently!' said the crow. 'I believe it may have been Kay, but he
has forgotten you by this time, I expect, for the Princess.'

'Does he live with a Princess?' asked Gerda.

'Yes, listen,' said the crow; 'but it is so difficult to speak your
language. If you understand "crow's language,"[1] I can tell you about
it much better.'

'No, I have never learnt it,' said Gerda; 'but grandmother knew it, and
used to speak it. If only I had learnt it!'

'It doesn't matter,' said the crow. 'I will tell you as well as I can,
although I may do it rather badly.'

Then he told her what he had heard.

'In this kingdom where we are now,' said he, 'there lives a Princess who
is very clever. She has read all the newspapers in the world, and
forgotten them again, so clever is she. One day she was sitting on her
throne, which is not such an amusing thing to do either, they say; and
she began humming a tune, which happened to be

    "Why should I not be married, oh why?"

"Why not indeed?" said she. And she made up her mind to marry, if she
could find a husband who had an answer ready when a question was put to
him. She called all the court ladies together, and when they heard what
she wanted they were delighted.

'"I like that now," they said. "I was thinking the same thing myself the
other day."

'Every word I say is true,' said the crow, 'for I have a tame
sweetheart who goes about the palace whenever she likes. She told me the
whole story.'

Of course his sweetheart was a crow, for 'birds of a feather flock
together,' and one crow always chooses another. The newspapers all came
out immediately with borders of hearts and the Princess's initials. They
gave notice that any young man who was handsome enough might go up to
the Palace to speak to the Princess. The one who spoke as if he were
quite at home, and spoke well, would be chosen by the Princess as her
husband. Yes, yes, you may believe me, it's as true as I sit here,' said
the crow. 'The people came crowding in; there was such running, and
crushing, but no one was fortunate enough to be chosen, either on the
first day, or on the second. They could all of them talk well enough in
the street, but when they entered the castle gates, and saw the guard in
silver uniforms, and when they went up the stairs through rows of
lackeys in gold embroidered liveries, their courage forsook them. When
they reached the brilliantly lighted reception-rooms, and stood in front
of the throne where the Princess was seated, they could think of nothing
to say, they only echoed her last words, and of course that was not what
she wanted.

'It was just as if they had all taken some kind of sleeping-powder,
which made them lethargic; they did not recover themselves until they
got out into the street again, and then they had plenty to say. There
was quite a long line of them, reaching from the town gates up to the
Palace.

'I went to see them myself,' said the crow. 'They were hungry and
thirsty, but they got nothing at the Palace, not even as much as a glass
of tepid water. Some of the wise ones had taken sandwiches with them,
but they did not share them with their neighbours; they thought if the
others went in to the Princess looking hungry, that there would be more
chance for themselves.'

'But Kay, little Kay!' asked Gerda; 'when did he come? was he amongst
the crowd?'

'Give me time, give me time! we are just coming to him. It was on the
third day that a little personage came marching cheerfully along,
without either carriage or horse. His eyes sparkled like yours, and he
had beautiful long hair, but his clothes were very shabby.'

'Oh, that was Kay!' said Gerda gleefully; 'then I have found him!' and
she clapped her hands.

'He had a little knapsack on his back!' said the crow.

'No, it must have been his sledge; he had it with him when he went
away!' said Gerda.

'It may be so,' said the crow; 'I did not look very particularly; but I
know from my sweetheart, that when he entered the Palace gates, and saw
the life-guards in their silver uniforms, and the lackeys on the stairs
in their gold-laced liveries, he was not the least bit abashed. He just
nodded to them and said, "It must be very tiresome to stand upon the
stairs. I am going inside!" The rooms were blazing with lights. Privy
councillors and excellencies without number were walking about barefoot
carrying golden vessels; it was enough to make you solemn! His boots
creaked fearfully too, but he wasn't a bit upset.'

'Oh, I am sure that was Kay!' said Gerda; 'I know he had a pair of new
boots, I heard them creaking in grandmother's room.'

'Yes, indeed they did creak!' said the crow. 'But nothing daunted, he
went straight up to the Princess, who was sitting on a pearl as big as a
spinning-wheel. Poor, simple boy! all the court ladies and their
attendants; the courtiers, and their gentlemen, each attended by a page,
were standing round. The nearer the door they stood, so much the greater
was their haughtiness; till the footman's boy, who always wore slippers
and stood in the doorway, was almost too proud even to be looked at.'

'It must be awful!' said little Gerda, 'and yet Kay has won the
Princess!'

'If I had not been a crow, I should have taken her myself,
notwithstanding that I am engaged. They say he spoke as well as I could
have done myself, when I speak crow-language; at least so my sweetheart
says. He was a picture of good looks and gallantry, and then, he had not
come with any idea of wooing the Princess, but simply to hear her
wisdom. He admired her just as much as she admired him!'

'Indeed it was Kay then,' said Gerda; 'he was so clever he could do
mental arithmetic up to fractions. Oh, won't you take me to the Palace?'

'It's easy enough to talk,' said the crow; 'but how are we to manage it?
I will talk to my tame sweetheart about it; she will have some advice to
give us I daresay, but I am bound to tell you that a little girl like
you will never be admitted!'

'Oh, indeed I shall,' said Gerda; 'when Kay hears that I am here, he
will come out at once to fetch me.'

'Wait here for me by the stile,' said the crow, then he wagged his head
and flew off.

The evening had darkened in before he came back. 'Caw, caw,' he said,
'she sends you greeting. And here is a little roll for you; she got it
out of the kitchen where there is bread enough, and I daresay you are
hungry! It is not possible for you to get into the Palace; you have bare
feet; the guards in silver and the lackeys in gold would never allow you
to pass. But don't cry, we shall get you in somehow; my sweetheart knows
a little back staircase which leads up to the bedroom, and she knows
where the key is kept.'

Then they went into the garden, into the great avenue where the leaves
were dropping, softly one by one; and when the Palace lights went out,
one after the other, the crow led little Gerda to the back door, which
was ajar.

Oh, how Gerda's heart beat with fear and longing! It was just as if she
was about to do something wrong, and yet she only wanted to know if this
really was little Kay. Oh, it must be him, she thought, picturing to
herself his clever eyes and his long hair. She could see his very smile
when they used to sit under the rose-trees at home. She thought he would
be very glad to see her, and to hear what a long way she had come to
find him, and to hear how sad they had all been at home when he did not
come back. Oh, it was joy mingled with fear.

They had now reached the stairs, where a little lamp was burning on a
shelf. There stood the tame sweetheart, twisting and turning her head to
look at Gerda, who made a curtsy, as grandmother had taught her.

'My betrothed has spoken so charmingly to me about you, my little miss!'
she said; 'your life, "_Vita_," as it is called, is most touching! If
you will take the lamp, I will go on in front. We shall take the
straight road here, and we shall meet no one.'

'It seems to me that some one is coming behind us,' said Gerda, as she
fancied something rushed past her, throwing a shadow on the walls;
horses with flowing manes and slender legs; huntsmen, ladies and
gentlemen on horseback.

'Oh, those are only the dreams!' said the crow; 'they come to take the
thoughts of the noble ladies and gentlemen out hunting. That's a good
thing, for you will be able to see them all the better in bed. But don't
forget, when you are taken into favour, to show a grateful spirit.'

'Now, there's no need to talk about that,' said the crow from the woods.

They came now into the first apartment; it was hung with rose-coloured
satin embroidered with flowers. Here again the dreams overtook them, but
they flitted by so quickly that Gerda could not distinguish them. The
apartments became one more beautiful than the other; they were enough to
bewilder anybody. They now reached the bedroom. The ceiling was like a
great palm with crystal leaves, and in the middle of the room two beds,
each like a lily hung from a golden stem. One was white, and in it lay
the Princess; the other was red, and there lay he whom Gerda had come to
seek--little Kay! She bent aside one of the crimson leaves, and she saw
a little brown neck. It was Kay. She called his name aloud, and held the
lamp close to him. Again the dreams rushed through the room on
horseback--he awoke, turned his head--and it was not little Kay.

It was only the Prince's neck which was like his; but he was young and
handsome. The Princess peeped out of her lily-white bed, and asked what
was the matter. Then little Gerda cried and told them all her story, and
what the crows had done to help her.

'You poor little thing!' said the Prince and Princess. And they praised
the crows, and said that they were not at all angry with them, but they
must not do it again. Then they gave them a reward.

'Would you like your liberty?' said the Princess, 'or would you prefer
permanent posts about the court as court crows, with perquisites from
the kitchen?'

Both crows curtsied and begged for the permanent posts, for they thought
of their old age, and said 'it was so good to have something for the old
man,' as they called it.

The Prince got up and allowed Gerda to sleep in his bed, and he could
not have done more. She folded her little hands, and thought 'how good
the people and the animals are'; then she shut her eyes and fell fast
asleep. All the dreams came flying back again; this time they looked
like angels, and they were dragging a little sledge with Kay sitting on
it, and he nodded. But it was only a dream; so it all vanished when she
woke.

Next day she was dressed in silk and velvet from head to foot; they
asked her to stay at the Palace and have a good time, but she only
begged them to give her a little carriage and horse, and a little pair
of boots, so that she might drive out into the wide world to look for
Kay.

They gave her a pair of boots and a muff. She was beautifully dressed,
and when she was ready to start, there before the door stood a new
chariot of pure gold. The Prince's and Princess's coat of arms were
emblazoned on it, and shone like a star. Coachman, footman, and
outrider, for there was even an outrider, all wore golden crowns. The
Prince and Princess themselves helped her into the carriage and wished
her joy. The wood crow, who was now married, accompanied her for the
first three miles; he sat beside Gerda, for he could not ride with his
back to the horses. The other crow stood at the door and flapped her
wings; she did not go with them, for she suffered from headache since
she had become a kitchen pensioner--the consequence of eating too much.
The chariot was stored with sugar biscuits, and there were fruit and
ginger nuts under the seat. 'Good-bye, good-bye,' cried the Prince and
Princess; little Gerda wept, and the crow wept too. At the end of the
first few miles the crow said good-bye, and this was the hardest parting
of all. It flew up into a tree and flapped its big black wings as long
as it could see the chariot, which shone like the brightest sunshine.

[1] Children have a kind of language, or gibberish, formed by adding
letters or syllables to every word, which is called 'crow's language.'


FIFTH STORY

THE LITTLE ROBBER GIRL

[Illustration: _'It is gold, it is gold!' they cried._]

They drove on through a dark wood, where the chariot lighted up the way
and blinded the robbers by its glare; it was more than they could bear.

'It is gold, it is gold!' they cried, and darting forward, seized the
horses, and killed the postilions, the coachman, and footman. They then
dragged little Gerda out of the carriage.

'She is fat, and she is pretty; she has been fattened on nuts!' said the
old robber woman, who had a long beard, and eyebrows that hung down over
her eyes. 'She is as good as a fat lamb, and how nice she will taste!'
She drew out her sharp knife as she said this; it glittered horribly.
'Oh!' screamed the old woman at the same moment, for her little daughter
had come up behind her, and she was biting her ear. She hung on her
back, as wild and as savage a little animal as you could wish to find.
'You bad, wicked child!' said her mother, but she was prevented from
killing Gerda on this occasion.

'She shall play with me,' said the little robber girl; 'she shall give
me her muff, and her pretty dress, and she shall sleep in my bed.' Then
she bit her mother again and made her dance. All the robbers laughed and
said, 'Look at her dancing with her cub!'

'I want to get into the carriage,' said the little robber girl, and she
always had her own way because she was so spoilt and stubborn. She and
Gerda got into the carriage, and then they drove over stubble and stones
further and further into the wood. The little robber girl was as big as
Gerda, but much stronger; she had broader shoulders, and darker skin,
her eyes were quite black, with almost a melancholy expression. She put
her arm round Gerda's waist and said--

'They shan't kill you as long as I don't get angry with you; you must
surely be a Princess!'

'No,' said little Gerda, and then she told her all her adventures, and
how fond she was of Kay.

The robber girl looked earnestly at her, gave a little nod, and said,
'They shan't kill you even if I am angry with you. I will do it myself.'
Then she dried Gerda's eyes, and stuck her own hands into the pretty
muff, which was so soft and warm.

At last the chariot stopped: they were in the courtyard of a robber's
castle, the walls of which were cracked from top to bottom. Ravens and
crows flew in and out of every hole, and big bulldogs, which each looked
ready to devour somebody, jumped about as high as they could, but they
did not bark, for it was not allowed. A big fire was burning in the
middle of the stone floor of the smoky old hall. The smoke all went up
to the ceiling, where it had to find a way out for itself. Soup was
boiling in a big caldron over the fire, and hares and rabbits were
roasting on the spits.

'You shall sleep with me and all my little pets to-night,' said the
robber girl.

When they had something to eat and drink they went along to one corner
which was spread with straw and rugs. There were nearly a hundred
pigeons roosting overhead on the rafters and beams. They seemed to be
asleep, but they fluttered about a little when the children came in.

'They are all mine,' said the little robber girl, seizing one of the
nearest. She held it by the legs and shook it till it flapped its wings.
'Kiss it,' she cried, dashing it at Gerda's face. 'Those are the wood
pigeons,' she added, pointing to some laths fixed across a big hole high
up on the walls; 'they are a regular rabble; they would fly away
directly if they were not locked in. And here is my old sweetheart Be,'
dragging forward a reindeer by the horn; it was tied up, and it had a
bright copper ring round its neck. 'We have to keep him close too, or he
would run off. Every single night I tickle his neck with my bright
knife, he is so frightened of it.' The little girl produced a long knife
out of a hole in the wall and drew it across the reindeer's neck. The
poor animal laughed and kicked, and the robber girl laughed and pulled
Gerda down into the bed with her.

'Do you have that knife by you while you are asleep?' asked Gerda,
looking rather frightened.

'I always sleep with a knife,' said the little robber girl. 'You never
know what will happen. But now tell me again what you told me before
about little Kay, and why you went out into the world.' So Gerda told
her all about it again, and the wood pigeons cooed up in their cage
above them; the other pigeons were asleep. The little robber girl put
her arm round Gerda's neck and went to sleep with the knife in her other
hand, and she was soon snoring. But Gerda would not close her eyes; she
did not know whether she was to live or to die. The robbers sat round
the fire, eating and drinking, and the old woman was turning
somersaults. This sight terrified the poor little girl. Then the wood
pigeons said, 'Coo, coo, we have seen little Kay; his sledge was drawn
by a white chicken, and he was sitting in the Snow Queen's sledge; it
was floating low down over the trees, while we were in our nests. She
blew upon us young ones, and they all died except we two; coo, coo.'

'What are you saying up there?' asked Gerda. 'Where was the Snow Queen
going? Do you know anything about it?'

'She was most likely going to Lapland, because there is always snow and
ice there! Ask the reindeer who is tied up there.'

'There is ice and snow, and it's a splendid place,' said the reindeer.
'You can run and jump about where you like on those big glittering
plains. The Snow Queen has her summer tent there, but her permanent
castle is up at the North Pole, on the island which is called
Spitzbergen!'

'Oh Kay, little Kay!' sighed Gerda.

'Lie still, or I shall stick the knife into you!' said the robber girl.

In the morning Gerda told her all that the wood pigeons had said, and
the little robber girl looked quite solemn, but she nodded her head and
said, 'No matter, no matter! Do you know where Lapland is?' she asked
the reindeer.

'Who should know better than I,' said the animal, its eyes dancing. 'I
was born and brought up there, and I used to leap about on the
snowfields.'

'Listen,' said the robber girl. 'You see that all our men folks are
away, but mother is still here, and she will stay; but later on in the
morning she will take a drink out of the big bottle there, and after
that she will have a nap--then I will do something for you.' Then she
jumped out of bed, ran along to her mother and pulled her beard, and
said, 'Good morning, my own dear nanny-goat!' And her mother filliped
her nose till it was red and blue; but it was all affection.

As soon as her mother had had her draught from the bottle and had
dropped asleep, the little robber girl went along to the reindeer, and
said, 'I should have the greatest pleasure in the world in keeping you
here, to tickle you with my knife, because you are such fun then;
however, it does not matter. I will untie your halter and help you
outside so that you may run away to Lapland, but you must put your best
foot foremost, and take this little girl for me to the Snow Queen's
palace, where her playfellow is. I have no doubt you heard what she was
telling me, for she spoke loud enough, and you are generally
eavesdropping!'

The reindeer jumped into the air for joy. The robber girl lifted little
Gerda up, and had the forethought to tie her on, nay, even to give her a
little cushion to sit upon. 'Here, after all, I will give you your fur
boots back, for it will be very cold, but I will keep your muff, it is
too pretty to part with. Still you shan't be cold. Here are my mother's
big mittens for you, they will reach up to your elbows; here, stick your
hands in! Now your hands look just like my nasty mother's!'

Gerda shed tears of joy.

'I don't like you to whimper!' said the little robber girl. 'You ought
to be looking delighted; and here are two loaves and a ham for you, so
that you shan't starve.'

These things were tied on to the back of the reindeer; the little robber
girl opened the door, called in all the big dogs, and then she cut the
halter with her knife, and said to the reindeer, 'Now run, but take care
of my little girl!'

Gerda stretched out her hands in the big mittens to the robber girl and
said good-bye; and then the reindeer darted off over briars and bushes,
through the big wood, over swamps and plains, as fast as it could go.
The wolves howled and the ravens screamed, while the red lights quivered
up in the sky.

'There are my old northern lights,' said the reindeer; 'see how they
flash!' and on it rushed faster than ever, day and night. The loaves
were eaten, and the ham too, and then they were in Lapland.


SIXTH STORY

THE LAPP WOMAN AND THE FINN WOMAN

[Illustration: _The reindeer did not dare to stop. It ran on till it
came to the bush with the red berries. There it put Gerda down, and
kissed her on the mouth, while big shining tears trickled down its
face._]

They stopped by a little hut, a very poverty-stricken one; the roof
sloped right down to the ground, and the door was so low that the people
had to creep on hands and knees when they wanted to go in or out. There
was nobody at home here but an old Lapp woman, who was frying fish over
a train-oil lamp. The reindeer told her all Gerda's story, but it told
its own first; for it thought it was much the most important. Gerda was
so overcome by the cold that she could not speak at all.

'Oh, you poor creatures!' said the Lapp woman; 'you've got a long way
to go yet; you will have to go hundreds of miles into Finmark, for the
Snow Queen is paying a country visit there, and she burns blue lights
every night. I will write a few words on a dried stock-fish, for I have
no paper. I will give it to you to take to the Finn woman up there. She
will be better able to direct you than I can.'

So when Gerda was warmed, and had eaten and drunk something, the Lapp
woman wrote a few words on a dried stock-fish and gave it to her,
bidding her take good care of it. Then she tied her on to the reindeer
again, and off they flew. Flicker, flicker, went the beautiful blue
northern lights up in the sky all night long;--at last they came to
Finmark, and knocked on the Finn woman's chimney, for she had no door at
all.

There was such a heat inside that the Finn woman went about almost
naked; she was little and very grubby. She at once loosened Gerda's
things, and took off the mittens and the boots, or she would have been
too hot. Then she put a piece of ice on the reindeer's head, and after
that she read what was written on the stock-fish. She read it three
times, and then she knew it by heart, and put the fish into the pot for
dinner; there was no reason why it should not be eaten, and she never
wasted anything.

Again the reindeer told his own story first, and then little Gerda's.
The Finn woman blinked with her wise eyes, but she said nothing.

'You are so clever,' said the reindeer, 'I know you can bind all the
winds of the world with a bit of sewing cotton. When a skipper unties
one knot he gets a good wind, when he unties two it blows hard, and if
he undoes the third and the fourth he brings a storm about his head wild
enough to blow down the forest trees. Won't you give the little girl a
drink, so that she may have the strength of twelve men to overcome the
Snow Queen?'

'The strength of twelve men,' said the Finn woman. 'Yes, that will be
about enough.'

She went along to a shelf and took down a big folded skin, which she
unrolled. There were curious characters written on it, and the Finn
woman read till the perspiration poured down her forehead.

But the reindeer again implored her to give Gerda something, and Gerda
looked at her with such beseeching eyes, full of tears, that the Finn
woman began blinking again, and drew the reindeer along into a corner,
where she whispered to it, at the same time putting fresh ice on its
head.

'Little Kay is certainly with the Snow Queen, and he is delighted with
everything there. He thinks it is the best place in the world, but that
is because he has got a splinter of glass in his heart and a grain of
glass in his eye. They will have to come out first, or he will never be
human again, and the Snow Queen will keep him in her power!'

'But can't you give little Gerda something to take which will give her
power to conquer it all?'

'I can't give her greater power than she already has. Don't you see how
great it is? Don't you see how both man and beast have to serve her? How
she has got on as well as she has on her bare feet? We must not tell her
what power she has; it is in her heart, because she is such a sweet
innocent child. If she can't reach the Snow Queen herself, then we can't
help her. The Snow Queen's gardens begin just two miles from here; you
can carry the little girl as far as that. Put her down by the big bush
standing there in the snow covered with red berries. Don't stand
gossiping, but hurry back to me!' Then the Finn woman lifted Gerda on
the reindeer's back, and it rushed off as hard as it could.

'Oh, I have not got my boots, and I have not got my mittens!' cried
little Gerda.

She soon felt the want of them in that cutting wind, but the reindeer
did not dare to stop. It ran on till it came to the bush with the red
berries. There it put Gerda down, and kissed her on the mouth, while big
shining tears trickled down its face. Then it ran back again as fast as
ever it could. There stood poor little Gerda, without shoes or
gloves, in the middle of freezing icebound Finmark.

She ran forward as quickly as she could. A whole regiment of snow-flakes
came towards her; they did not fall from the sky, for it was quite
clear, with the northern lights shining brightly. No; these snow-flakes
ran along the ground, and the nearer they came the bigger they grew.
Gerda remembered well how big and ingenious they looked under the
magnifying glass. But the size of these was monstrous. They were alive;
they were the Snow Queen's advanced guard, and they took the most
curious shapes. Some looked like big, horrid porcupines, some like
bundles of knotted snakes with their heads sticking out. Others, again,
were like fat little bears with bristling hair, but all were dazzling
white and living snow-flakes.

Then little Gerda said the Lord's Prayer, and the cold was so great that
her breath froze as it came out of her mouth, and she could see it like
a cloud of smoke in front of her. It grew thicker and thicker, till it
formed itself into bright little angels, who grew bigger and bigger when
they touched the ground. They all wore helmets, and carried shields and
spears in their hands. More and more of them appeared, and when Gerda
had finished her prayer she was surrounded by a whole legion. They
pierced the snow-flakes with their spears and shivered them into a
hundred pieces, and little Gerda walked fearlessly and undauntedly
through them. The angels touched her hands and her feet, and then she
hardly felt how cold it was, but walked quickly on towards the Palace of
the Snow Queen.

Now we must see what Kay was about. He was not thinking about Gerda at
all, least of all that she was just outside the Palace.


SEVENTH STORY

WHAT HAPPENED IN THE SNOW QUEEN'S PALACE AND AFTERWARDS

[Illustration: _The Snow Queen sat in the very middle of it when she sat
at home._]

The Palace walls were made of drifted snow, and the windows and doors of
the biting winds. There were over a hundred rooms in it, shaped just as
the snow had drifted. The biggest one stretched for many miles. They
were all lighted by the strongest northern lights. All the rooms were
immensely big and empty, and glittering in their iciness. There was
never any gaiety in them; not even so much as a ball for the little
bears, when the storms might have turned up as the orchestra, and the
polar bears might have walked about on their hind legs and shown off
their grand manners. There was never even a little game-playing party,
for such games as 'touch last' or 'the biter bit'--no, not even a little
gossip over the coffee cups for the white fox misses. Immense, vast,
and cold were the Snow Queen's halls. The northern lights came and went
with such regularity that you could count the seconds between their
coming and going. In the midst of these never-ending snow-halls was a
frozen lake. It was broken up on the surface into a thousand bits, but
each piece was so exactly like the others that the whole formed a
perfect work of art. The Snow Queen sat in the very middle of it when
she sat at home. She then said that she was sitting on 'The Mirror of
Reason,' and that it was the best and only one in the world.

Little Kay was blue with cold, nay, almost black; but he did not know
it, for the Snow Queen had kissed away the icy shiverings, and his heart
was little better than a lump of ice. He went about dragging some sharp,
flat pieces of ice, which he placed in all sorts of patterns, trying to
make something out of them; just as when we at home have little tablets
of wood, with which we make patterns, and call them a 'Chinese puzzle.'

Kay's patterns were most ingenious, because they were the 'Ice Puzzles
of Reason.' In his eyes they were first-rate and of the greatest
importance: this was because of the grain of glass still in his eye. He
made many patterns forming words, but he never could find out the right
way to place them for one particular word, a word he was most anxious to
make. It was 'Eternity.' The Snow Queen had said to him that if he could
find out this word he should be his own master, and she would give him
the whole world and a new pair of skates. But he could not discover it.

'Now I am going to fly away to the warm countries,' said the Snow Queen.
'I want to go and peep into the black caldrons!' She meant the volcanoes
Etna and Vesuvius by this. 'I must whiten them a little; it does them
good, and the lemons and the grapes too!' And away she flew.

Kay sat quite alone in all those many miles of empty ice halls. He
looked at his bits of ice, and thought and thought, till something gave
way within him. He sat so stiff and immovable that one might have
thought he was frozen to death.

Then it was that little Gerda walked into the Palace, through the great
gates in a biting wind. She said her evening prayer, and the wind
dropped as if lulled to sleep, and she walked on into the big empty
hall. She saw Kay, and knew him at once; she flung her arms round his
neck, held him fast, and cried, 'Kay, little Kay, have I found you at
last?'

But he sat still, rigid and cold.

Then little Gerda shed hot tears; they fell upon his breast and
penetrated to his heart. Here they thawed the lump of ice, and melted
the little bit of the mirror which was in it. He looked at her, and she
sang:

    'Where roses deck the flowery vale,
    There, Infant Jesus, we thee hail!'

Then Kay burst into tears; he cried so much that the grain of glass
was washed out of his eye. He knew her, and shouted with joy, 'Gerda,
dear little Gerda! where have you been for such a long time? And where
have I been?' He looked round and said, 'How cold it is here; how empty
and vast!' He kept tight hold of Gerda, who laughed and cried for joy.
Their happiness was so heavenly that even the bits of ice danced for joy
around them; and when they settled down, there they lay! just in the
very position the Snow Queen had told Kay he must find out, if he was to
become his own master and have the whole world and a new pair of skates.

Gerda kissed his cheeks and they grew rosy, she kissed his eyes and they
shone like hers, she kissed his hands and his feet, and he became well
and strong. The Snow Queen might come home whenever she liked, his order
of release was written there in shining letters of ice.

They took hold of each other's hands and wandered out of the big Palace.
They talked about grandmother, and about the roses upon the roof.
Wherever they went the winds lay still and the sun broke through the
clouds. When they reached the bush with the red berries they found the
reindeer waiting for them, and he had brought another young reindeer
with him, whose udders were full. The children drank her warm milk and
kissed her on the mouth. Then they carried Kay and Gerda, first to the
Finn woman, in whose heated hut they warmed themselves and received
directions about the homeward journey. Then they went on to the Lapp
woman; she had made new clothes for them and prepared her sledge. Both
the reindeer ran by their side, to the boundaries of the country; here
the first green buds appeared, and they said 'Good-bye' to the reindeer
and the Lapp woman. They heard the first little birds twittering and saw
the buds in the forest. Out of it came riding a young girl on a
beautiful horse, which Gerda knew, for it had drawn the golden chariot.
She had a scarlet cap on her head and pistols in her belt; it was the
little robber girl, who was tired of being at home. She was riding
northwards to see how she liked it before she tried some other part of
the world. She knew them again, and Gerda recognised her with delight.

'You are a nice fellow to go tramping off!' she said to little Kay. 'I
should like to know if you deserve to have somebody running to the end
of the world for your sake!'

But Gerda patted her cheek, and asked about the Prince and Princess.

'They are travelling in foreign countries,' said the robber girl.

'But the crow?' asked Gerda.

'Oh, the crow is dead!' she answered. 'The tame sweetheart is a widow,
and goes about with a bit of black wool tied round her leg. She pities
herself bitterly, but it's all nonsense! But tell me how you got on
yourself, and where you found him.'

Gerda and Kay both told her all about it.

'Snip, snap, snurre, it's all right at last then!' she said, and she
took hold of their hands and promised that if she ever passed through
their town she would pay them a visit. Then she rode off into the wide
world. But Kay and Gerda walked on, hand in hand, and wherever they went
they found the most delightful spring and blooming flowers. Soon they
recognised the big town where they lived, with its tall towers, in which
the bells still rang their merry peals. They went straight on to
grandmother's door, up the stairs and into her room. Everything was just
as they had left it, and the old clock ticked in the corner, and the
hands pointed to the time. As they went through the door into the room
they perceived that they were grown up. The roses clustered round the
open window, and there stood their two little chairs. Kay and Gerda sat
down upon them, still holding each other by the hand. All the cold empty
grandeur of the Snow Queen's palace had passed from their memory like a
bad dream. Grandmother sat in God's warm sunshine reading from her
Bible.

'Without ye become as little children ye cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.'

Kay and Gerda looked into each other's eyes, and then all at once the
meaning of the old hymn came to them.

    'Where roses deck the flowery vale,
    There, Infant Jesus, we thee hail!'

And there they both sat, grown up and yet children, children at heart;
and it was summer--warm, beautiful summer.

THE MERMAID


Far out at sea the water is as blue as the bluest cornflower, and as
clear as the clearest crystal; but it is very deep, too deep for any
cable to fathom, and if many steeples were piled on the top of one
another they would not reach from the bed of the sea to the surface of
the water. It is down there that the Mermen live.

Now don't imagine that there are only bare white sands at the bottom; oh
no! the most wonderful trees and plants grow there, with such flexible
stalks and leaves, that at the slightest motion of the water they move
just as if they were alive. All the fish, big and little, glide among
the branches just as, up here, birds glide through the air. The palace
of the Merman King lies in the very deepest part; its walls are of coral
and the long pointed windows of the clearest amber, but the roof is made
of mussel shells which open and shut with the lapping of the water. This
has a lovely effect, for there are gleaming pearls in every shell, any
one of which would be the pride of a queen's crown.

The Merman King had been for many years a widower, but his old mother
kept house for him; she was a clever woman, but so proud of her noble
birth that she wore twelve oysters on her tail, while the other grandees
were only allowed six. Otherwise she was worthy of all praise,
especially because she was so fond of the little mermaid princesses, her
grandchildren. They were six beautiful children, but the youngest was
the prettiest of all; her skin was as soft and delicate as a roseleaf,
her eyes as blue as the deepest sea, but like all the others she had no
feet, and instead of legs she had a fish's tail.

All the livelong day they used to play in the palace in the great halls,
where living flowers grew out of the walls. When the great amber windows
were thrown open the fish swam in, just as the swallows fly into our
rooms when we open the windows, but the fish swam right up to the little
princesses, ate out of their hands, and allowed themselves to be patted.

[Illustration: _The Merman King had been for many years a widower, but
his old mother kept house for him; she was a clever woman, but so proud
of her noble birth that she wore twelve oysters on her tail, while the
other grandees were only allowed six._]

Outside the palace was a large garden, with fiery red and deep blue
trees, the fruit of which shone like gold, while the flowers glowed like
fire on their ceaselessly waving stalks. The ground was of the finest
sand, but it was of a blue phosphorescent tint. Everything was bathed in
a wondrous blue light down there; you might more readily have supposed
yourself to be high up in the air, with only the sky above and below
you, than that you were at the bottom of the ocean. In a dead calm you
could just catch a glimpse of the sun like a purple flower with a
stream of light radiating from its calyx.

Each little princess had her own little plot of garden, where she could
dig and plant just as she liked. One made her flower-bed in the shape of
a whale; another thought it nice to have hers like a little mermaid; but
the youngest made hers quite round like the sun, and she would only have
flowers of a rosy hue like its beams. She was a curious child, quiet and
thoughtful, and while the other sisters decked out their gardens with
all kinds of extraordinary objects which they got from wrecks, she would
have nothing besides the rosy flowers like the sun up above, except a
statue of a beautiful boy. It was hewn out of the purest white marble
and had gone to the bottom from some wreck. By the statue she planted a
rosy red weeping willow which grew splendidly, and the fresh delicate
branches hung round and over it, till they almost touched the blue sand
where the shadows showed violet, and were ever moving like the branches.
It looked as if the leaves and the roots were playfully interchanging
kisses.

Nothing gave her greater pleasure than to hear about the world of human
beings up above; she made her old grandmother tell her all that she knew
about ships and towns, people and animals. But above all it seemed
strangely beautiful to her that up on the earth the flowers were
scented, for they were not so at the bottom of the sea; also that the
woods were green, and that the fish which were to be seen among the
branches could sing so loudly and sweetly that it was a delight to
listen to them. You see the grandmother called little birds fish, or the
mermaids would not have understood her, as they had never seen a bird.

'When you are fifteen,' said the grandmother, 'you will be allowed to
rise up from the sea and sit on the rocks in the moonlight, and look at
the big ships sailing by, and you will also see woods and towns.'

One of the sisters would be fifteen in the following year, but the
others,--well, they were each one year younger than the other, so that
the youngest had five whole years to wait before she would be allowed to
come up from the bottom, to see what things were like on earth. But each
one promised the others to give a full account of all that she had seen,
and found most wonderful on the first day. Their grandmother could never
tell them enough, for there were so many things about which they wanted
information.

None of them was so full of longings as the youngest, the very one who
had the longest time to wait, and who was so quiet and dreamy. Many a
night she stood by the open windows and looked up through the dark blue
water which the fish were lashing with their tails and fins. She could
see the moon and the stars, it is true; their light was pale, but they
looked much bigger through the water than they do to our eyes. When she
saw a dark shadow glide between her and them, she knew that it was
either a whale swimming above her, or else a ship laden with human
beings. I am certain they never dreamt that a lovely little mermaid was
standing down below, stretching up her white hands towards the keel.

The eldest princess had now reached her fifteenth birthday, and was to
venture above the water. When she came back she had hundreds of things
to tell them, but the most delightful of all, she said, was to lie in
the moonlight, on a sandbank in a calm sea, and to gaze at the large
town close to the shore, where the lights twinkled like hundreds of
stars; to listen to music and the noise and bustle of carriages and
people, to see the many church towers and spires, and to hear the bells
ringing; and just because she could not go on shore she longed for that
most of all.

Oh, how eagerly the youngest sister listened! and when, later in the
evening she stood at the open window and looked up through the dark blue
water, she thought of the big town with all its noise and bustle, and
fancied that she could even hear the church bells ringing.

The year after, the second sister was allowed to mount up through the
water and swim about wherever she liked. The sun was just going down
when she reached the surface, the most beautiful sight, she thought,
that she had ever seen. The whole sky had looked like gold, she said,
and as for the clouds! well, their beauty was beyond description; they
floated in red and violet splendour over her head, and, far faster than
they went, a flock of wild swans flew like a long white veil over the
water towards the setting sun; she swam towards it, but it sank and all
the rosy light on clouds and water faded away.

The year after that the third sister went up, and, being much the most
venturesome of them all, swam up a broad river which ran into the sea.
She saw beautiful green, vine-clad hills; palaces and country seats
peeping through splendid woods. She heard the birds singing, and the sun
was so hot that she was often obliged to dive, to cool her burning face.
In a tiny bay she found a troop of little children running about naked
and paddling in the water; she wanted to play with them, but they were
frightened and ran away. Then a little black animal came up; it was a
dog, but she had never seen one before; it barked so furiously at her
that she was frightened and made for the open sea. She could never
forget the beautiful woods, the green hills and the lovely children who
could swim in the water although they had no fishes' tails.

The fourth sister was not so brave; she stayed in the remotest part of
the ocean, and, according to her account, that was the most beautiful
spot. You could see for miles and miles around you, and the sky above
was like a great glass dome. She had seen ships, but only far away, so
that they looked like sea-gulls. There were grotesque dolphins turning
somersaults, and gigantic whales squirting water through their nostrils
like hundreds of fountains on every side.

Now the fifth sister's turn came. Her birthday fell in the winter, so
that she saw sights that the others had not seen on their first trips.
The sea looked quite green, and large icebergs were floating about, each
one of which looked like a pearl, she said, but was much bigger than the
church towers built by men. They took the most wonderful shapes, and
sparkled like diamonds. She had seated herself on one of the largest,
and all the passing ships sheered off in alarm when they saw her sitting
there with her long hair streaming loose in the wind.

In the evening the sky became overcast with dark clouds; it thundered
and lightened, and the huge icebergs glittering in the bright lightning,
were lifted high into the air by the black waves. All the ships
shortened sail, and there was fear and trembling on every side, but she
sat quietly on her floating iceberg watching the blue lightning flash in
zigzags down on to the shining sea.

The first time any of the sisters rose above the water she was delighted
by the novelties and beauties she saw; but once grown up, and at liberty
to go where she liked, she became indifferent and longed for her home;
in the course of a month or so they all said that after all their own
home in the deep was best, it was so cosy there.

Many an evening the five sisters interlacing their arms would rise above
the water together. They had lovely voices, much clearer than any
mortal, and when a storm was rising, and they expected ships to be
wrecked, they would sing in the most seductive strains of the wonders of
the deep, bidding the seafarers have no fear of them. But the sailors
could not understand the words, they thought it was the voice of the
storm; nor could it be theirs to see this Elysium of the deep, for when
the ship sank they were drowned, and only reached the Merman's palace in
death. When the elder sisters rose up in this manner, arm-in-arm, in the
evening, the youngest remained behind quite alone, looking after them as
if she must weep; but mermaids have no tears, and so they suffer all the
more.

'Oh! if I were only fifteen!' she said, 'I know how fond I shall be of
the world above, and of the mortals who dwell there.'

At last her fifteenth birthday came.

'Now we shall have you off our hands,' said her grandmother, the old
queen-dowager. 'Come now, let me adorn you like your other sisters!' and
she put a wreath of white lilies round her hair, but every petal of the
flowers was half a pearl; then the old queen had eight oysters fixed on
to the princess's tail to show her high rank.

'But it hurts so!' said the little mermaid.

'You must endure the pain for the sake of the finery!' said her
grandmother.

But oh! how gladly would she have shaken off all this splendour, and
laid aside the heavy wreath. Her red flowers in her garden suited her
much better, but she did not dare to make any alteration. 'Good-bye,'
she said, and mounted as lightly and airily as a bubble through the
water.

The sun had just set when her head rose above the water, but the clouds
were still lighted up with a rosy and golden splendour, and the evening
star sparkled in the soft pink sky, the air was mild and fresh, and the
sea as calm as a millpond. A big three-masted ship lay close by with
only a single sail set, for there was not a breath of wind, and the
sailors were sitting about the rigging, on the cross-trees, and at the
mast-heads. There was music and singing on board, and as the evening
closed in hundreds of gaily coloured lanterns were lighted--they looked
like the flags of all nations waving in the air. The little mermaid swam
right up to the cabin windows, and every time she was lifted by the
swell she could see through the transparent panes crowds of gaily
dressed people. The handsomest of them all was the young prince with
large dark eyes; he could not be much more than sixteen, and all these
festivities were in honour of his birthday. The sailors danced on deck,
and when the prince appeared among them hundreds of rockets were let off
making it as light as day, and frightening the little mermaid so much
that she had to dive under the water. She soon ventured up again, and it
was just as if all the stars of heaven were falling in showers round
about her. She had never seen such magic fires. Great suns whirled
round, gorgeous fire-fish hung in the blue air, and all was reflected
in the calm and glassy sea. It was so light on board the ship that every
little rope could be seen, and the people still better. Oh, how handsome
the prince was! how he laughed and smiled as he greeted his guests,
while the music rang out in the quiet night.

It got quite late, but the little mermaid could not take her eyes off
the ship and the beautiful prince. The coloured lanterns were put out,
no more rockets were sent up, and the cannon had ceased its thunder, but
deep down in the sea there was a dull murmuring and moaning sound.
Meanwhile she was rocked up and down on the waves, so that she could
look into the cabin; but the ship got more and more way on, sail after
sail was filled by the wind, the waves grew stronger, great clouds
gathered, and it lightened in the distance. Oh, there was going to be a
fearful storm! and soon the sailors had to shorten sail. The great ship
rocked and rolled as she dashed over the angry sea, the black waves rose
like mountains, high enough to overwhelm her, but she dived like a swan
through them and rose again and again on their towering crests. The
little mermaid thought it a most amusing race, but not so the sailors.
The ship creaked and groaned; the mighty timbers bulged and bent under
the heavy blows; the water broke over the decks, snapping the main mast
like a reed; she heeled over on her side, and the water rushed into the
hold.

Now the little mermaid saw that they were in danger, and she had for
her own sake to beware of the floating beams and wreckage. One moment it
was so pitch dark that she could not see at all, but when the lightning
flashed it became so light that she could see all on board. Every man
was looking out for his own safety as best he could; but she more
particularly followed the young prince with her eyes, and when the ship
went down she saw him sink in the deep sea. At first she was quite
delighted, for now he was coming to be with her, but then she remembered
that human beings could not live under water, and that only if he were
dead could he go to her father's palace. No! he must not die; so she
swam towards him all among the drifting beams and planks, quite
forgetting that they might crush her. She dived deep down under the
water, and came up again through the waves, and at last reached the
young prince just as he was becoming unable to swim any further in the
stormy sea. His limbs were numbed, his beautiful eyes were closing, and
he must have died if the little mermaid had not come to the rescue. She
held his head above the water and let the waves drive them whithersoever
they would.

By daybreak all the storm was over, of the ship not a trace was to be
seen; the sun rose from the water in radiant brilliance, and his rosy
beams seemed to cast a glow of life into the prince's cheeks, but his
eyes remained closed. The mermaid kissed his fair and lofty brow, and
stroked back the dripping hair; it seemed to her that he was like the
marble statue in her little garden; she kissed him again and longed that
he might live.

At last she saw dry land before her, high blue mountains on whose
summits the white snow glistened as if a flock of swans had settled
there; down by the shore were beautiful green woods, and in the
foreground a church or temple, she did not quite know which, but it was
a building of some sort. Lemon and orange trees grew in the garden, and
lofty palms stood by the gate. At this point the sea formed a little bay
where the water was quite calm, but very deep, right up to the cliffs;
at their foot was a strip of fine white sand to which she swam with the
beautiful prince, and laid him down on it, taking great care that his
head should rest high up in the warm sunshine.

The bells now began to ring in the great white building, and a number of
young maidens came into the garden. Then the little mermaid swam further
off behind some high rocks and covered her hair and breast with foam, so
that no one should see her little face, and then she watched to see who
would discover the poor prince.

[Illustration: _His limbs were numbed, his beautiful eyes were closing,
and he must have died if the little mermaid had not come to the
rescue._]

It was not long before one of the maidens came up to him. At first she
seemed quite frightened, but only for a moment, and then she fetched
several others, and the mermaid saw that the prince was coming to life,
and that he smiled at all those around him, but he never smiled at her.
You see he did not know that she had saved him. She felt so sad
that when he was led away into the great building she dived sorrowfully
into the water and made her way home to her father's palace.

Always silent and thoughtful, she became more so now than ever. Her
sisters often asked her what she had seen on her first visit to the
surface, but she never would tell them anything.

Many an evening and many a morning she would rise to the place where she
had left the prince. She saw the fruit in the garden ripen, and then
gathered, she saw the snow melt on the mountain-tops, but she never saw
the prince, so she always went home still sadder than before. At home
her only consolation was to sit in her little garden with her arms
twined round the handsome marble statue which reminded her of the
prince. It was all in gloomy shade now, as she had ceased to tend her
flowers, and the garden had become a neglected wilderness of long stalks
and leaves entangled with the branches of the tree.

At last she could not bear it any longer, so she told one of her
sisters, and from her it soon spread to the others, but to no one else
except to one or two other mermaids who only told their dearest friends.
One of these knew all about the prince; she had also seen the
festivities on the ship; she knew where he came from and where his
kingdom was situated.

'Come, little sister!' said the other princesses, and, throwing their
arms round each other's shoulders, they rose from the water in a long
line, just in front of the prince's palace.

It was built of light yellow glistening stone, with great marble
staircases, one of which led into the garden. Magnificent gilded cupolas
rose above the roof, and the spaces between the columns which encircled
the building were filled with life-like marble statues. Through the
clear glass of the lofty windows you could see gorgeous halls adorned
with costly silken hangings, and the pictures on the walls were a sight
worth seeing. In the midst of the central hall a large fountain played,
throwing its jets of spray upwards to a glass dome in the roof, through
which the sunbeams lighted up the water and the beautiful plants which
grew in the great basin.

She knew now where he lived, and often used to go there in the evenings
and by night over the water. She swam much nearer the land than any of
the others dared; she even ventured right up the narrow channel under
the splendid marble terrace which threw a long shadow over the water.
She used to sit here looking at the young prince, who thought he was
quite alone in the clear moonlight.

She saw him many an evening sailing about in his beautiful boat, with
flags waving and music playing; she used to peep through the green
rushes, and if the wind happened to catch her long silvery veil and any
one saw it, they only thought it was a swan flapping its wings.

Many a night she heard the fishermen, who were fishing by torchlight,
talking over the good deeds of the young prince; and she was happy to
think that she had saved his life when he was drifting about on the
waves, half dead, and she could not forget how closely his head had
pressed her breast, and how passionately she had kissed him; but he knew
nothing of all this, and never saw her even in his dreams.

She became fonder and fonder of mankind, and longed more and more to be
able to live among them; their world seemed so infinitely bigger than
hers; with their ships they could scour the ocean, they could ascend the
mountains high above the clouds, and their wooded, grass-grown lands
extended further than her eye could reach. There was so much that she
wanted to know, but her sisters could not give an answer to all her
questions, so she asked her old grandmother, who knew the upper world
well, and rightly called it the country above the sea.

'If men are not drowned,' asked the little mermaid, 'do they live for
ever? Do they not die as we do down here in the sea?'

'Yes,' said the old lady, 'they have to die too, and their lifetime is
even shorter than ours. We may live here for three hundred years, but
when we cease to exist we become mere foam on the water and do not have
so much as a grave among our dear ones. We have no immortal souls; we
have no future life; we are just like the green sea-weed, which, once
cut down, can never revive again! Men, on the other hand, have a soul
which lives for ever, lives after the body has become dust; it rises
through the clear air, up to the shining stars! Just as we rise from the
water to see the land of mortals, so they rise up to unknown beautiful
regions which we shall never see.'

'Why have we no immortal souls?' asked the little mermaid sadly. 'I
would give all my three hundred years to be a human being for one day,
and afterwards to have a share in the heavenly kingdom.'

'You must not be thinking about that,' said the grandmother; 'we are
much better off and happier than human beings.'

'Then I shall have to die and to float as foam on the water, and never
hear the music of the waves or see the beautiful flowers or the red sun!
Is there nothing I can do to gain an immortal soul?'

'No,' said the grandmother; 'only if a human being so loved you that you
were more to him than father or mother, if all his thoughts and all his
love were so centred in you that he would let the priest join your hands
and would vow to be faithful to you here, and to all eternity; then your
body would become infused with his soul. Thus, and only thus, could you
gain a share in the felicity of mankind. He would give you a soul while
yet keeping his own. But that can never happen! That which is your
greatest beauty in the sea, your fish's tail, is thought hideous up on
earth, so little do they understand about it; to be pretty there you
must have two clumsy supports which they call legs!'

Then the little mermaid sighed and looked sadly at her fish's tail.

'Let us be happy,' said the grandmother; 'we will hop and skip during
our three hundred years of life; it is surely a long enough time; and
after it is over we shall rest all the better in our graves. There is to
be a court ball to-night.'

This was a much more splendid affair than we ever see on earth. The
walls and the ceiling of the great ballroom were of thick but
transparent glass. Several hundreds of colossal mussel shells, rose red
and grass green, were ranged in order round the sides holding blue
lights, which illuminated the whole room and shone through the walls, so
that the sea outside was quite lit up. You could see countless fish,
great and small, swimming towards the glass walls, some with shining
scales of crimson hue, while others were golden and silvery. In the
middle of the room was a broad stream of running water, and on this the
mermaids and mermen danced to their own beautiful singing. No earthly
beings have such lovely voices. The little mermaid sang more sweetly
than any of them, and they all applauded her. For a moment she felt glad
at heart, for she knew that she had the finest voice either in the sea
or on land. But she soon began to think again about the upper world, she
could not forget the handsome prince and her sorrow in not possessing,
like him, an immortal soul. Therefore she stole out of her father's
palace, and while all within was joy and merriment, she sat sadly in her
little garden. Suddenly she heard the sound of a horn through the water,
and she thought, 'Now he is out sailing up there; he whom I love more
than father or mother, he to whom my thoughts cling and to whose hands I
am ready to commit the happiness of my life. I will dare anything to win
him and to gain an immortal soul! While my sisters are dancing in my
father's palace I will go to the sea-witch, of whom I have always been
very much afraid; she will perhaps be able to advise and help me!'

Thereupon the little mermaid left the garden and went towards the
roaring whirlpools at the back of which the witch lived. She had never
been that way before; no flowers grew there, no seaweed, only the bare
grey sands, stretched towards the whirlpools, which like rushing
mill-wheels swirled round, dragging everything that came within reach
down to the depths. She had to pass between these boiling eddies to
reach the witch's domain, and for a long way the only path led over warm
bubbling mud, which the witch called her 'peat bog.' Her house stood
behind this in the midst of a weird forest. All the trees and bushes
were polyps, half animal and half plant; they looked like hundred-headed
snakes growing out of the sand, the branches were long slimy arms, with
tentacles like wriggling worms, every joint of which, from the root to
the outermost tip, was in constant motion. They wound themselves tightly
round whatever they could lay hold of and never let it escape. The
little mermaid standing outside was quite frightened, her heart beat
fast with terror and she nearly turned back, but then she remembered the
prince and the immortal soul of mankind and took courage. She bound her
long flowing hair tightly round her head, so that the polyps should not
seize her by it, folded her hands over her breast, and darted like a
fish through the water, in between the hideous polyps, which stretched
out their sensitive arms and tentacles towards her. She could see that
every one of them had something or other, which they had grasped with
their hundred arms, and which they held as if in iron bands. The
bleached bones of men who had perished at sea and sunk below peeped
forth from the arms of some, while others clutched rudders and
sea-chests, or the skeleton of some land animal; and most horrible of
all, a little mermaid whom they had caught and suffocated. Then she came
to a large opening in the wood where the ground was all slimy, and where
some huge fat water snakes were gambolling about. In the middle of this
opening was a house built of the bones of the wrecked; there sat the
witch, letting a toad eat out of her mouth, just as mortals let a little
canary eat sugar. She called the hideous water snakes her little
chickens, and allowed them to crawl about on her unsightly bosom.

'I know very well what you have come here for,' said the witch. 'It is
very foolish of you! all the same you shall have your way, because it
will lead you into misfortune, my fine princess. You want to get rid of
your fish's tail, and instead to have two stumps to walk about upon like
human beings, so that the young prince may fall in love with you, and
that you may win him and an immortal soul.' Saying this, she gave such a
loud hideous laugh that the toad and the snakes fell to the ground and
wriggled about there.

'You are just in the nick of time,' said the witch; 'after sunrise
to-morrow I should not be able to help you until another year had run
its course. I will make you a potion, and before sunrise you must swim
ashore with it, seat yourself on the beach and drink it; then your tail
will divide and shrivel up to what men call beautiful legs. But it
hurts; it is as if a sharp sword were running through you. All who see
you will say that you are the most beautiful child of man they have ever
seen. You will keep your gliding gait, no dancer will rival you, but
every step you take will be as if you were treading upon sharp knives,
so sharp as to draw blood. If you are willing to suffer all this I am
ready to help you!'

'Yes!' said the little princess with a trembling voice, thinking of the
prince and of winning an undying soul.

'But remember,' said the witch, 'when once you have received a human
form, you can never be a mermaid again; you will never again be able to
dive down through the water to your sisters and to your father's palace.
And if you do not succeed in winning the prince's love, so that for your
sake he will forget father and mother, cleave to you with his whole
heart, let the priest join your hands and make you man and wife, you
will gain no immortal soul! The first morning after his marriage with
another your heart will break, and you will turn into foam of the sea.'

'I will do it,' said the little mermaid as pale as death.

'But you will have to pay me, too,' said the witch, 'and it is no trifle
that I demand. You have the most beautiful voice of any at the bottom of
the sea, and I daresay that you think you will fascinate him with it;
but you must give me that voice; I will have the best you possess in
return for my precious potion! I have to mingle my own blood with it so
as to make it as sharp as a two-edged sword.'

'But if you take my voice,' said the little mermaid, 'what have I left?'

'Your beautiful form,' said the witch, 'your gliding gait, and your
speaking eyes; with these you ought surely to be able to bewitch a human
heart. Well! have you lost courage? Put out your little tongue, and I
will cut it off in payment for the powerful draught.'

'Let it be done,' said the little mermaid, and the witch put on her
caldron to brew the magic potion. 'There is nothing like cleanliness,'
said she, as she scoured the pot with a bundle of snakes; then she
punctured her breast and let the black blood drop into the caldron, and
the steam took the most weird shapes, enough to frighten any one. Every
moment the witch threw new ingredients into the pot, and when it boiled
the bubbling was like the sound of crocodiles weeping. At last the
potion was ready and it looked like the clearest water.

'There it is,' said the witch, and thereupon she cut off the tongue of
the little mermaid, who was dumb now and could neither sing nor speak.

'If the polyps should seize you, when you go back through my wood,' said
the witch, 'just drop a single drop of this liquid on them, and their
arms and fingers will burst into a thousand pieces.' But the little
mermaid had no need to do this, for at the mere sight of the bright
liquid, which sparkled in her hand like a shining star, they drew back
in terror. So she soon got past the wood, the bog, and the eddying
whirlpools.

She saw her father's palace; the lights were all out in the great
ballroom, and no doubt all the household was asleep, but she did not
dare to go in now that she was dumb and about to leave her home for
ever. She felt as if her heart would break with grief. She stole into
the garden and plucked a flower from each of her sisters' plots, wafted
with her hand countless kisses towards the palace, and then rose up
through the dark blue water.

[Illustration: _But the little mermaid had no need to do this, for at
the mere sight of the bright liquid which sparkled in her hand like a
shining star, they drew back in terror._]

The sun had not risen when she came in sight of the prince's palace
and landed at the beautiful marble steps. The moon was shining bright
and clear. The little mermaid drank the burning, stinging draught, and
it was like a sharp, two-edged sword running through her tender frame;
she fainted away and lay as if she were dead. When the sun rose on the
sea she woke up and became conscious of a sharp pang, but just in front
of her stood the handsome young prince, fixing his coal black eyes on
her; she cast hers down and saw that her fish's tail was gone, and that
she had the prettiest little white legs any maiden could desire; but she
was quite naked, so she wrapped her long thick hair around her. The
prince asked who she was and how she came there. She looked at him
tenderly and with a sad expression in her dark blue eyes, but could not
speak. Then he took her by the hand and led her into the palace. Every
step she took was, as the witch had warned her beforehand, as if she
were treading on sharp knives and spikes, but she bore it gladly; led by
the prince, she moved as lightly as a bubble, and he and every one else
marvelled at her graceful gliding gait.

Clothed in the costliest silks and muslins she was the greatest beauty
in the palace, but she was dumb, and could neither sing nor speak.
Beautiful slaves clad in silks and gold came forward and sang to the
prince and his royal parents; one of them sang better than all the
others, and the prince clapped his hands and smiled at her; that made
the little mermaid very sad, for she knew that she used to sing far
better herself. She thought, 'Oh! if he only knew that for the sake of
being with him I had given up my voice for ever!' Now the slaves began
to dance, graceful undulating dances to enchanting music; thereupon the
little mermaid, lifting her beautiful white arms and raising herself on
tiptoe, glided on the floor with a grace which none of the other dancers
had yet attained. With every motion her grace and beauty became more
apparent, and her eyes appealed more deeply to the heart than the songs
of the slaves. Every one was delighted with it, especially the prince,
who called her his little foundling; and she danced on and on,
notwithstanding that every time her foot touched the ground it was like
treading on sharp knives. The prince said that she should always be near
him, and she was allowed to sleep outside his door on a velvet cushion.

He had a man's dress made for her, so that she could ride about with
him. They used to ride through scented woods, where the green branches
brushed her shoulders, and little birds sang among the fresh leaves. She
climbed up the highest mountains with the prince, and although her
delicate feet bled so that others saw it, she only laughed and followed
him until they saw the clouds sailing below them like a flock of birds,
taking flight to distant lands.

[Illustration: _The prince asked who she was and how she came there; she
looked at him tenderly and with a sad expression in her dark blue eyes,
but could not speak._]

At home in the prince's palace, when at night the others were
asleep, she used to go out on to the marble steps; it cooled her
burning feet to stand in the cold sea-water, and at such times she used
to think of those she had left in the deep.

One night her sisters came arm in arm; they sang so sorrowfully as they
swam on the water that she beckoned to them, and they recognised her,
and told her how she had grieved them all. After that they visited her
every night, and one night she saw, a long way out, her old grandmother
(who for many years had not been above the water), and the Merman King
with his crown on his head; they stretched out their hands towards her,
but did not venture so close to land as her sisters.

Day by day she became dearer to the prince; he loved her as one loves a
good sweet child, but it never entered his head to make her his queen;
yet unless she became his wife she would never win an everlasting soul,
but on his wedding morning would turn to sea-foam.

'Am I not dearer to you than any of them?' the little mermaid's eyes
seemed to say when he took her in his arms and kissed her beautiful
brow.

'Yes, you are the dearest one to me,' said the prince, 'for you have the
best heart of them all, and you are fondest of me; you are also like a
young girl I once saw, but whom I never expect to see again. I was on
board a ship which was wrecked; I was driven on shore by the waves close
to a holy Temple where several young girls were ministering at a
service; the youngest of them found me on the beach and saved my life; I
saw her but twice. She was the only person I could love in this world,
but you are like her, you almost drive her image out of my heart. She
belongs to the holy Temple, and therefore by good fortune you have been
sent to me; we will never part!'

'Alas! he does not know that it was I who saved his life,' thought the
little mermaid. 'I bore him over the sea to the wood where the Temple
stands. I sat behind the foam and watched to see if any one would come.
I saw the pretty girl he loves better than me.' And the mermaid heaved a
bitter sigh, for she could not weep.

'The girl belongs to the holy Temple, he has said; she will never return
to the world, they will never meet again. I am here with him; I see him
every day. Yes! I will tend him, love him, and give up my life to him.'

But now the rumour ran that the prince was to be married to the
beautiful daughter of a neighbouring king, and for that reason was
fitting out a splendid ship. It was given out that the prince was going
on a voyage to see the adjoining countries, but it was without doubt to
see the king's daughter; he was to have a great suite with him. But the
little mermaid shook her head and laughed; she knew the prince's
intentions much better than any of the others. 'I must take this
voyage,' he had said to her; 'I must go and see the beautiful princess;
my parents demand that, but they will never force me to bring her home
as my bride; I can never love her! She will not be like the lovely girl
in the Temple whom you resemble. If ever I had to choose a bride it
would sooner be you with your speaking eyes, my sweet, dumb foundling!'
And he kissed her rosy mouth, played with her long hair, and laid his
head upon her heart, which already dreamt of human joys and an immortal
soul.

'You are not frightened of the sea, I suppose, my dumb child?' he said,
as they stood on the proud ship which was to carry them to the country
of the neighbouring king; and he told her about storms and calms, about
curious fish in the deep, and the marvels seen by divers; and she smiled
at his tales, for she knew all about the bottom of the sea much better
than any one else.

At night, in the moonlight, when all were asleep, except the steersman
who stood at the helm, she sat at the side of the ship trying to pierce
the clear water with her eyes, and fancied she saw her father's palace,
and above it her old grandmother with her silver crown on her head,
looking up through the cross currents towards the keel of the ship. Then
her sisters rose above the water; they gazed sadly at her, wringing
their white hands. She beckoned to them, smiled, and was about to tell
them that all was going well and happily with her, when the cabin-boy
approached, and the sisters dived down, but he supposed that the white
objects he had seen were nothing but flakes of foam.

The next morning the ship entered the harbour of the neighbouring king's
magnificent city. The church bells rang and trumpets were sounded from
every lofty tower, while the soldiers paraded with flags flying and
glittering bayonets. There was a _fte_ every day, there was a
succession of balls, and receptions followed one after the other, but
the princess was not yet present; she was being brought up a long way
off, in a holy Temple they said, and was learning all the royal virtues.
At last she came. The little mermaid stood eager to see her beauty, and
she was obliged to confess that a lovelier creature she had never
beheld. Her complexion was exquisitely pure and delicate, and her
trustful eyes of the deepest blue shone through their dark lashes.

'It is you,' said the prince, 'you who saved me when I lay almost
lifeless on the beach?' and he clasped his blushing bride to his heart.
'Oh! I am too happy!' he exclaimed to the little mermaid.

'A greater joy than I had dared to hope for has come to pass. You will
rejoice at my joy, for you love me better than any one.' Then the little
mermaid kissed his hand, and felt as if her heart were broken already.

His wedding morn would bring death to her and change her to foam.

All the church bells pealed and heralds rode through the town
proclaiming the nuptials. Upon every altar throughout the land fragrant
oil was burnt in costly silver lamps. Amidst the swinging of censers by
the priests the bride and bridegroom joined hands and received the
bishop's blessing. The little mermaid dressed in silk and gold stood
holding the bride's train, but her ears were deaf to the festal strains,
her eyes saw nothing of the sacred ceremony; she was thinking of her
coming death and of all that she had lost in this world.

That same evening the bride and bridegroom embarked, amidst the roar of
cannon and the waving of banners. A royal tent of purple and gold softly
cushioned was raised amidships where the bridal pair were to repose
during the calm cool night.

The sails swelled in the wind and the ship skimmed lightly and almost
without motion over the transparent sea.

At dusk lanterns of many colours were lighted and the sailors danced
merrily on deck. The little mermaid could not help thinking of the first
time she came up from the sea and saw the same splendour and gaiety; and
she now threw herself among the dancers, whirling, as a swallow skims
through the air when pursued. The onlookers cheered her in amazement,
never had she danced so divinely; her delicate feet pained her as if
they were cut with knives, but she did not feel it, for the pain at her
heart was much sharper. She knew that it was the last night that she
would breathe the same air as he, and would look upon the mighty deep,
and the blue starry heavens; an endless night without thought and
without dreams awaited her, who neither had a soul, nor could win one.
The joy and revelry on board lasted till long past midnight; she went on
laughing and dancing with the thought of death all the time in her
heart. The prince caressed his lovely bride and she played with his
raven locks, and with their arms entwined they retired to the gorgeous
tent. All became hushed and still on board the ship, only the steersman
stood at the helm; the little mermaid laid her white arms on the gunwale
and looked eastwards for the pink-tinted dawn; the first sunbeam, she
knew, would be her death. Then she saw her sisters rise from the water;
they were as pale as she was; their beautiful long hair no longer
floated on the breeze, for it had been cut off.

[Illustration: _Once more she looked at the prince, with her eyes
already dimmed by death, then dashed overboard and fell, her body
dissolving into foam._]

'We have given it to the witch to obtain her help, so that you may not
die to-night! She has given us a knife; here it is, look how sharp it
is! Before the sun rises, you must plunge it into the prince's heart,
and when his warm blood sprinkles your feet they will join together and
grow into a tail, and you will once more be a mermaid; you will be able
to come down into the water to us, and to live out your three hundred
years before you are turned into dead, salt sea-foam. Make haste! you or
he must die before sunrise! Our old grandmother is so full of grief that
her white hair has fallen off as ours fell under the witch's scissors.
Slay the prince and come back to us! Quick! Quick! do you not see
the rosy streak in the sky? In a few minutes the sun will rise and then
you must die!' saying this they heaved a wondrous deep sigh and sank
among the waves.

The little mermaid drew aside the purple curtain from the tent and
looked at the beautiful bride asleep with her head on the prince's
breast. She bent over him and kissed his fair brow, looked at the sky
where the dawn was spreading fast, looked at the sharp knife, and again
fixed her eyes on the prince, who, in his dream called his bride by
name. Yes! she alone was in his thoughts! For a moment the knife
quivered in her grasp, then she threw it far out among the waves, now
rosy in the morning light, and where it fell the water bubbled up like
drops of blood.

Once more she looked at the prince, with her eyes already dimmed by
death, then dashed overboard and fell, her body dissolving into foam.

Now the sun rose from the sea and with its kindly beams warmed the
deadly cold foam, so that the little mermaid did not feel the chill of
death. She saw the bright sun, and above her floated hundreds of
beauteous ethereal beings, through which she could see the white ship
and the rosy heavens; their voices were melodious, but so spirit-like
that no human ear could hear them, any more than earthly eye could see
their forms. Light as bubbles they floated through the air without the
aid of wings. The little mermaid perceived that she had a form like
theirs; it gradually took shape out of the foam. 'To whom am I coming?'
said she, and her voice sounded like that of the other beings, so
unearthly in its beauty that no music of ours could reproduce it.

'To the daughters of the air!' answered the others; 'a mermaid has no
undying soul, and can never gain one without winning the love of a human
being. Her eternal life must depend upon an unknown power. Nor have the
daughters of the air an everlasting soul, but by their own good deeds
they may create one for themselves. We fly to the tropics where mankind
is the victim of hot and pestilent winds; there we bring cooling
breezes. We diffuse the scent of flowers all around, and bring
refreshment and healing in our train. When, for three hundred years, we
have laboured to do all the good in our power, we gain an undying soul
and take a part in the everlasting joys of mankind. You, poor little
mermaid, have with your whole heart struggled for the same thing as we
have struggled for. You have suffered and endured, raised yourself to
the spirit-world of the air, and now, by your own good deeds you may, in
the course of three hundred years, work out for yourself an undying
soul.'

Then the little mermaid lifted her transparent arms towards God's sun,
and for the first time shed tears.

On board ship all was again life and bustle. She saw the prince with his
lovely bride searching for her; they looked sadly at the bubbling foam,
as if they knew that she had thrown herself into the waves. Unseen she
kissed the bride on her brow, smiled at the prince, and rose aloft with
the other spirits of the air to the rosy clouds which sailed above.

'In three hundred years we shall thus float into Paradise.'

'We might reach it sooner,' whispered one. 'Unseen we flit into those
homes of men where there are children, and for every day that we find a
good child who gives pleasure to its parents and deserves their love God
shortens our time of probation. The child does not know when we fly
through the room, and when we smile with pleasure at it one year of our
three hundred is taken away. But if we see a naughty or badly disposed
child, we cannot help shedding tears of sorrow, and every tear adds a
day to the time of our probation.'




THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES


Many years ago there was an Emperor, who was so excessively fond of new
clothes that he spent all his money on them. He cared nothing about his
soldiers, nor for the theatre, nor for driving in the woods except for
the sake of showing off his new clothes. He had a costume for every hour
in the day, and instead of saying, as one does about any other king or
emperor, 'He is in his council chamber,' here one always said, 'The
Emperor is in his dressing-room.'

Life was very gay in the great town where he lived; hosts of strangers
came to visit it every day, and among them one day two swindlers. They
gave themselves out as weavers, and said that they knew how to weave the
most beautiful stuffs imaginable. Not only were the colours and patterns
unusually fine, but the clothes that were made of the stuffs had the
peculiar quality of becoming invisible to every person who was not fit
for the office he held, or if he was impossibly dull.

'Those must be splendid clothes,' thought the Emperor. 'By wearing them
I should be able to discover which men in my kingdom are unfitted for
their posts. I shall distinguish the wise men from the fools. Yes, I
certainly must order some of that stuff to be woven for me.'

He paid the two swindlers a lot of money in advance so that they might
begin their work at once.

They did put up two looms and pretended to weave, but they had nothing
whatever upon their shuttles. At the outset they asked for a quantity of
the finest silk and the purest gold thread, all of which they put into
their own bags, while they worked away at the empty looms far into the
night.

'I should like to know how those weavers are getting on with the stuff,'
thought the Emperor; but he felt a little queer when he reflected that
any one who was stupid or unfit for his post would not be able to see
it. He certainly thought that he need have no fears for himself, but
still he thought he would send somebody else first to see how it was
getting on. Everybody in the town knew what wonderful power the stuff
possessed, and every one was anxious to see how stupid his neighbour
was.

'I will send my faithful old minister to the weavers,' thought the
Emperor. 'He will be best able to see how the stuff looks, for he is a
clever man, and no one fulfils his duties better than he does!'

So the good old minister went into the room where the two swindlers sat
working at the empty loom.

'Heaven preserve us!' thought the old minister, opening his eyes very
wide. 'Why, I can't see a thing!' But he took care not to say so.

Both the swindlers begged him to be good enough to step a little nearer,
and asked if he did not think it a good pattern and beautiful colouring.
They pointed to the empty loom, and the poor old minister stared as hard
as he could, but he could not see anything, for of course there was
nothing to see.

'Good heavens!' thought he, 'is it possible that I am a fool. I have
never thought so, and nobody must know it. Am I not fit for my post? It
will never do to say that I cannot see the stuffs.'

'Well, sir, you don't say anything about the stuff,' said the one who
was pretending to weave.

'Oh, it is beautiful! quite charming!' said the old minister, looking
through his spectacles; 'this pattern and these colours! I will
certainly tell the Emperor that the stuff pleases me very much.'

'We are delighted to hear you say so,' said the swindlers, and then they
named all the colours and described the peculiar pattern. The old
minister paid great attention to what they said, so as to be able to
repeat it when he got home to the Emperor.

[Illustration: _They pointed to the empty loom, and the poor old
minister stared as hard as he could, but he could not see anything, for
of course there was nothing to see._]

Then the swindlers went on to demand more money, more silk, and
more gold, to be able to proceed with the weaving; but they put it all
into their own pockets--not a single strand was ever put into the loom,
but they went on as before weaving at the empty loom.

The Emperor soon sent another faithful official to see how the stuff was
getting on, and if it would soon be ready. The same thing happened to
him as to the minister; he looked and looked, but as there was only the
empty loom, he could see nothing at all.

'Is not this a beautiful piece of stuff?' said both the swindlers,
showing and explaining the beautiful pattern and colours which were not
there to be seen.

'I know I am not a fool!' thought the man, 'so it must be that I am
unfit for my good post! It is very strange, though! However, one must
not let it appear!' So he praised the stuff he did not see, and assured
them of his delight in the beautiful colours and the originality of the
design. 'It is absolutely charming!' he said to the Emperor. Everybody
in the town was talking about this splendid stuff.

Now the Emperor thought he would like to see it while it was still on
the loom. So, accompanied by a number of selected courtiers, among whom
were the two faithful officials who had already seen the imaginary
stuff, he went to visit the crafty impostors, who were working away as
hard as ever they could at the empty loom.

'It is magnificent!' said both the honest officials. 'Only see, your
Majesty, what a design! What colours!' And they pointed to the empty
loom, for they thought no doubt the others could see the stuff.

'What!' thought the Emperor; 'I see nothing at all! This is terrible! Am
I a fool? Am I not fit to be Emperor? Why, nothing worse could happen to
me!'

'Oh, it is beautiful!' said the Emperor. 'It has my highest approval!'
and he nodded his satisfaction as he gazed at the empty loom. Nothing
would induce him to say that he could not see anything.

The whole suite gazed and gazed, but saw nothing more than all the
others. However, they all exclaimed with his Majesty, 'It is very
beautiful!' and they advised him to wear a suit made of this wonderful
cloth on the occasion of a great procession which was just about to take
place. 'It is magnificent! gorgeous! excellent!' went from mouth to
mouth; they were all equally delighted with it. The Emperor gave each of
the rogues an order of knighthood to be worn in their buttonholes and
the title of 'Gentlemen weavers.'

[Illustration: _Then the emperor walked along in the procession under
the gorgeous canopy, and everybody in the streets and at the windows
exclaimed, 'How beautiful the Emperor's new clothes are!'_]

The swindlers sat up the whole night, before the day on which the
procession was to take place, burning sixteen candles; so that people
might see how anxious they were to get the Emperor's new clothes ready.
They pretended to take the stuff off the loom. They cut it out in the
air with a huge pair of scissors, and they stitched away with
needles without any thread in them. At last they said: 'Now the
Emperor's new clothes are ready!'

The Emperor, with his grandest courtiers, went to them himself, and both
the swindlers raised one arm in the air, as if they were holding
something, and said: 'See, these are the trousers, this is the coat,
here is the mantle!' and so on. 'It is as light as a spider's web. One
might think one had nothing on, but that is the very beauty of it!'

'Yes!' said all the courtiers, but they could not see anything, for
there was nothing to see.

'Will your imperial majesty be graciously pleased to take off your
clothes,' said, the impostors, 'so that we may put on the new ones,
along here before the great mirror?'

The Emperor took off all his clothes, and the impostors pretended to
give him one article of dress after the other of the new ones which they
had pretended to make. They pretended to fasten something round his
waist and to tie on something; this was the train, and the Emperor
turned round and round in front of the mirror.

'How well his majesty looks in the new clothes! How becoming they are!'
cried all the people round. 'What a design, and what colours! They are
most gorgeous robes!'

'The canopy is waiting outside which is to be carried over your majesty
in the procession,' said the master of the ceremonies.

'Well, I am quite ready,' said the Emperor. 'Don't the clothes fit
well?' and then he turned round again in front of the mirror, so that he
should seem to be looking at his grand things.

The chamberlains who were to carry the train stooped and pretended to
lift it from the ground with both hands, and they walked along with
their hands in the air. They dared not let it appear that they could not
see anything.

Then the Emperor walked along in the procession under the gorgeous
canopy, and everybody in the streets and at the windows exclaimed, 'How
beautiful the Emperor's new clothes are! What a splendid train! And they
fit to perfection!' Nobody would let it appear that he could see
nothing, for then he would not be fit for his post, or else he was a
fool.

None of the Emperor's clothes had been so successful before.

'But he has got nothing on,' said a little child.

'Oh, listen to the innocent,' said its father; and one person whispered
to the other what the child had said. 'He has nothing on; a child says
he has nothing on!'

'But he has nothing on!' at last cried all the people.

The Emperor writhed, for he knew it was true, but he thought 'the
procession must go on now,' so held himself stiffer than ever, and the
chamberlains held up the invisible train.




THE RAVEN.


Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
"'T is some visiter," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door--
                                          Only this, and nothing more."

Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
Eagerly I wished the morrow:--vainly I had sought to borrow
From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
                                          Nameless here for evermore.

And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
"'T is some visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door
Some late visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
                                          This it is, and nothing more."

Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
"Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you"--here I opened wide the door;--
                                          Darkness there, and nothing more.

Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,
And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"
                                          Merely this and nothing more.

Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
Soon again I heard a tapping, somewhat louder than before.
"Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;--
                                          'T is the wind and nothing more!"

Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he;
But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
                                          Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
"Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no craven,
Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore,--
Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
                                          With such name as "Nevermore."

But the Raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only
That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
Nothing further then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
Till I scarcely more than muttered, "Other friends have flown before--
On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before."
                                          Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
"Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
                                          Of 'Never--nevermore.'"

But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;
Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt and ominous bird of yore
                                          Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamplight gloated o'er,
But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o'er
                                          _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!

Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
Swung by seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
"Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!
Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe, and forget this lost Lenore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil--prophet still, if bird or devil!
By that Heaven that bends above, us--by that God we both adore--
Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked, upstarting--
"Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
And the lamplight o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                                          Shall be lifted--nevermore!


     BOOK I




                                CHAPTER
                                   1


Robert Cohn was once middleweight boxing champion of Princeton. Do not
think that I am very much impressed by that as a boxing title, but it
meant a lot to Cohn. He cared nothing for boxing, in fact he disliked
it, but he learned it painfully and thoroughly to counteract the feeling
of inferiority and shyness he had felt on being treated as a Jew at
Princeton. There was a certain inner comfort in knowing he could knock
down anybody who was snooty to him, although, being very shy and a
thoroughly nice boy, he never fought except in the gym. He was Spider
Kellys star pupil. Spider Kelly taught all his young gentlemen to box
like featherweights, no matter whether they weighed one hundred and five
or two hundred and five pounds. But it seemed to fit Cohn. He was really
very fast. He was so good that Spider promptly overmatched him and got
his nose permanently flattened. This increased Cohns distaste for
boxing, but it gave him a certain satisfaction of some strange sort, and
it certainly improved his nose. In his last year at Princeton he read
too much and took to wearing spectacles. I never met any one of his
class who remembered him. They did not even remember that he was
middleweight boxing champion.

I mistrust all frank and simple people, especially when their stories
hold together, and I always had a suspicion that perhaps Robert Cohn had
never been middleweight boxing champion, and that perhaps a horse had
stepped on his face, or that maybe his mother had been frightened or
seen something, or that he had, maybe, bumped into something as a young
child, but I finally had somebody verify the story from Spider Kelly.
Spider Kelly not only remembered Cohn. He had often wondered what had
become of him.

Robert Cohn was a member, through his father, of one of the richest
Jewish families in New York, and through his mother of one of the
oldest. At the military school where he prepped for Princeton, and
played a very good end on the football team, no one had made him
race-conscious. No one had ever made him feel he was a Jew, and hence
any different from anybody else, until he went to Princeton. He was a
nice boy, a friendly boy, and very shy, and it made him bitter. He took
it out in boxing, and he came out of Princeton with painful
self-consciousness and the flattened nose, and was married by the first
girl who was nice to him. He was married five years, had three children,
lost most of the fifty thousand dollars his father left him, the balance
of the estate having gone to his mother, hardened into a rather
unattractive mould under domestic unhappiness with a rich wife; and just
when he had made up his mind to leave his wife she left him and went off
with a miniature-painter. As he had been thinking for months about
leaving his wife and had not done it because it would be too cruel to
deprive her of himself, her departure was a very healthful shock.

The divorce was arranged and Robert Cohn went out to the Coast. In
California he fell among literary people and, as he still had a little
of the fifty thousand left, in a short time he was backing a review of
the Arts. The review commenced publication in Carmel, California, and
finished in Provincetown, Massachusetts. By that time Cohn, who had been
regarded purely as an angel, and whose name had appeared on the
editorial page merely as a member of the advisory board, had become the
sole editor. It was his money and he discovered he liked the authority
of editing. He was sorry when the magazine became too expensive and he
had to give it up.

By that time, though, he had other things to worry about. He had been
taken in hand by a lady who hoped to rise with the magazine. She was
very forceful, and Cohn never had a chance of not being taken in hand.
Also he was sure that he loved her. When this lady saw that the magazine
was not going to rise, she became a little disgusted with Cohn and
decided that she might as well get what there was to get while there was
still something available, so she urged that they go to Europe, where
Cohn could write. They came to Europe, where the lady had been educated,
and stayed three years. During these three years, the first spent in
travel, the last two in Paris, Robert Cohn had two friends, Braddocks
and myself. Braddocks was his literary friend. I was his tennis friend.

The lady who had him, her name was Frances, found toward the end of the
second year that her looks were going, and her attitude toward Robert
changed from one of careless possession and exploitation to the absolute
determination that he should marry her. During this time Roberts mother
had settled an allowance on him, about three hundred dollars a month.
During two years and a half I do not believe that Robert Cohn looked at
another woman. He was fairly happy, except that, like many people living
in Europe, he would rather have been in America, and he had discovered
writing. He wrote a novel, and it was not really such a bad novel as the
critics later called it, although it was a very poor novel. He read many
books, played bridge, played tennis, and boxed at a local gymnasium.

I first became aware of his ladys attitude toward him one night after
the three of us had dined together. We had dined at lAvenues and
afterward went to the Caf de Versailles for coffee. We had several
_fines_ after the coffee, and I said I must be going. Cohn had been
talking about the two of us going off somewhere on a weekend trip. He
wanted to get out of town and get in a good walk. I suggested we fly to
Strasbourg and walk up to Saint Odile, or somewhere or other in Alsace.
I know a girl in Strasbourg who can show us the town, I said.

Somebody kicked me under the table. I thought it was accidental and went
on: Shes been there two years and knows everything there is to know
about the town. Shes a swell girl.

I was kicked again under the table and, looking, saw Frances, Roberts
lady, her chin lifting and her face hardening.

Hell, I said, why go to Strasbourg? We could go up to Bruges, or to
the Ardennes.

Cohn looked relieved. I was not kicked again. I said good-night and went
out. Cohn said he wanted to buy a paper and would walk to the corner
with me. For Gods sake, he said, why did you say that about that
girl in Strasbourg for? Didnt you see Frances?

No, why should I? If I know an American girl that lives in Strasbourg
what the hell is it to Frances?

It doesnt make any difference. Any girl. I couldnt go, that would be
all.

Dont be silly.

You dont know Frances. Any girl at all. Didnt you see the way she
looked?

Oh, well, I said, lets go to Senlis.

Dont get sore.

Im not sore. Senlis is a good place and we can stay at the Grand Cerf
and take a hike in the woods and come home.

Good, that will be fine.

Well, Ill see you to-morrow at the courts, I said.

Good-night, Jake, he said, and started back to the caf.

You forgot to get your paper, I said.

Thats so. He walked with me up to the kiosque at the corner. You are
not sore, are you, Jake? He turned with the paper in his hand.

No, why should I be?

See you at tennis, he said. I watched him walk back to the caf
holding his paper. I rather liked him and evidently she led him quite a
life.




                                CHAPTER
                                   2


That winter Robert Cohn went over to America with his novel, and it was
accepted by a fairly good publisher. His going made an awful row I
heard, and I think that was where Frances lost him, because several
women were nice to him in New York, and when he came back he was quite
changed. He was more enthusiastic about America than ever, and he was
not so simple, and he was not so nice. The publishers had praised his
novel pretty highly and it rather went to his head. Then several women
had put themselves out to be nice to him, and his horizons had all
shifted. For four years his horizon had been absolutely limited to his
wife. For three years, or almost three years, he had never seen beyond
Frances. I am sure he had never been in love in his life.

He had married on the rebound from the rotten time he had in college,
and Frances took him on the rebound from his discovery that he had not
been everything to his first wife. He was not in love yet but he
realized that he was an attractive quantity to women, and that the fact
of a woman caring for him and wanting to live with him was not simply a
divine miracle. This changed him so that he was not so pleasant to have
around. Also, playing for higher stakes than he could afford in some
rather steep bridge games with his New York connections, he had held
cards and won several hundred dollars. It made him rather vain of his
bridge game, and he talked several times of how a man could always make
a living at bridge if he were ever forced to.

Then there was another thing. He had been reading W. H. Hudson. That
sounds like an innocent occupation, but Cohn had read and reread The
Purple Land. The Purple Land is a very sinister book if read too late
in life. It recounts splendid imaginary amorous adventures of a perfect
English gentleman in an intensely romantic land, the scenery of which is
very well described. For a man to take it at thirty-four as a guide-book
to what life holds is about as safe as it would be for a man of the same
age to enter Wall Street direct from a French convent, equipped with a
complete set of the more practical Alger books. Cohn, I believe, took
every word of The Purple Land as literally as though it had been an
R. G. Dun report. You understand me, he made some reservations, but on
the whole the book to him was sound. It was all that was needed to set
him off. I did not realize the extent to which it had set him off until
one day he came into my office.

Hello, Robert, I said. Did you come in to cheer me up?

Would you like to go to South America, Jake? he asked.

No.

Why not?

I dont know. I never wanted to go. Too expensive. You can see all the
South Americans you want in Paris anyway.

Theyre not the real South Americans.

They look awfully real to me.

I had a boat train to catch with a weeks mail stories, and only half of
them written.

Do you know any dirt? I asked.

No.

None of your exalted connections getting divorces?

No; listen, Jake. If I handled both our expenses, would you go to South
America with me?

Why me?

You can talk Spanish. And it would be more fun with two of us.

No, I said, I like this town and I go to Spain in the summer-time.

All my life Ive wanted to go on a trip like that, Cohn said. He sat
down. Ill be too old before I can ever do it.

Dont be a fool, I said. You can go anywhere you want. Youve got
plenty of money.

I know. But I cant get started.

Cheer up, I said. All countries look just like the moving pictures.

But I felt sorry for him. He had it badly.

I cant stand it to think my life is going so fast and Im not really
living it.

Nobody ever lives their life all the way up except bull-fighters.

Im not interested in bull-fighters. Thats an abnormal life. I want to
go back in the country in South America. We could have a great trip.

Did you ever think about going to British East Africa to shoot?

No, I wouldnt like that.

Id go there with you.

No; that doesnt interest me.

Thats because you never read a book about it. Go on and read a book
all full of love affairs with the beautiful shiny black princesses.

I want to go to South America.

He had a hard, Jewish, stubborn streak.

Come on down-stairs and have a drink.

Arent you working?

No, I said. We went down the stairs to the caf on the ground floor. I
had discovered that was the best way to get rid of friends. Once you had
a drink all you had to say was: Well, Ive got to get back and get off
some cables, and it was done. It is very important to discover graceful
exits like that in the newspaper business, where it is such an important
part of the ethics that you should never seem to be working. Anyway, we
went down-stairs to the bar and had a whiskey and soda. Cohn looked at
the bottles in bins around the wall. This is a good place, he said.

Theres a lot of liquor, I agreed.

Listen, Jake, he leaned forward on the bar. Dont you ever get the
feeling that all your life is going by and youre not taking advantage
of it? Do you realize youve lived nearly half the time you have to live
already?

Yes, every once in a while.

Do you know that in about thirty-five years more well be dead?

What the hell, Robert, I said. What the hell.

Im serious.

Its one thing I dont worry about, I said.

You ought to.

Ive had plenty to worry about one time or other. Im through
worrying.

Well, I want to go to South America.

Listen, Robert, going to another country doesnt make any difference.
Ive tried all that. You cant get away from yourself by moving from one
place to another. Theres nothing to that.

But youve never been to South America.

South America hell! If you went there the way you feel now it would be
exactly the same. This is a good town. Why dont you start living your
life in Paris?

Im sick of Paris, and Im sick of the Quarter.

Stay away from the Quarter. Cruise around by yourself and see what
happens to you.

Nothing happens to me. I walked alone all one night and nothing
happened except a bicycle cop stopped me and asked to see my papers.

Wasnt the town nice at night?

I dont care for Paris.

So there you were. I was sorry for him, but it was not a thing you could
do anything about, because right away you ran up against the two
stubbornnesses: South America could fix it and he did not like Paris. He
got the first idea out of a book, and I suppose the second came out of a
book too.

Well, I said, Ive got to go up-stairs and get off some cables.

Do you really have to go?

Yes, Ive got to get these cables off.

Do you mind if I come up and sit around the office?

No, come on up.

He sat in the outer room and read the papers, and the Editor and
Publisher and I worked hard for two hours. Then I sorted out the
carbons, stamped on a by-line, put the stuff in a couple of big manila
envelopes and rang for a boy to take them to the Gare St. Lazare. I went
out into the other room and there was Robert Cohn asleep in the big
chair. He was asleep with his head on his arms. I did not like to wake
him up, but I wanted to lock the office and shove off. I put my hand on
his shoulder. He shook his head. I cant do it, he said, and put his
head deeper into his arms. I cant do it. Nothing will make me do it.

Robert, I said, and shook him by the shoulder. He looked up. He smiled
and blinked.

Did I talk out loud just then?

Something. But it wasnt clear.

God, what a rotten dream!

Did the typewriter put you to sleep?

Guess so. I didnt sleep all last night.

What was the matter?

Talking, he said.

I could picture it. I have a rotten habit of picturing the bedroom
scenes of my friends. We went out to the Caf Napolitain to have an
_apritif_ and watch the evening crowd on the Boulevard.




                                CHAPTER
                                   3


It was a warm spring night and I sat at a table on the terrace of the
Napolitain after Robert had gone, watching it get dark and the electric
signs come on, and the red and green stop-and-go traffic-signal, and the
crowd going by, and the horse-cabs clippety-clopping along at the edge
of the solid taxi traffic, and the _poules_ going by, singly and in
pairs, looking for the evening meal. I watched a good-looking girl walk
past the table and watched her go up the street and lost sight of her,
and watched another, and then saw the first one coming back again. She
went by once more and I caught her eye, and she came over and sat down
at the table. The waiter came up.

Well, what will you drink? I asked.

Pernod.

Thats not good for little girls.

Little girl yourself. Dites garon, un pernod.

A pernod for me, too.

Whats the matter? she asked. Going on a party?

Sure. Arent you?

I dont know. You never know in this town.

Dont you like Paris?

No.

Why dont you go somewhere else?

Isnt anywhere else.

Youre happy, all right.

Happy, hell!

Pernod is greenish imitation absinthe. When you add water it turns
milky. It tastes like licorice and it has a good uplift, but it drops
you just as far. We sat and drank it, and the girl looked sullen.

Well, I said, are you going to buy me a dinner?

She grinned and I saw why she made a point of not laughing. With her
mouth closed she was a rather pretty girl. I paid for the saucers and we
walked out to the street. I hailed a horse-cab and the driver pulled up
at the curb. Settled back in the slow, smoothly rolling _fiacre_ we
moved up the Avenue de lOpra, passed the locked doors of the shops,
their windows lighted, the Avenue broad and shiny and almost deserted.
The cab passed the New York _Herald_ bureau with the window full of
clocks.

What are all the clocks for? she asked.

They show the hour all over America.

Dont kid me.

We turned off the Avenue up the Rue des Pyramides, through the traffic
of the Rue de Rivoli, and through a dark gate into the Tuileries. She
cuddled against me and I put my arm around her. She looked up to be
kissed. She touched me with one hand and I put her hand away.

Never mind.

Whats the matter? You sick?

Yes.

Everybodys sick. Im sick, too.

We came out of the Tuileries into the light and crossed the Seine and
then turned up the Rue des Saints Pres.

You oughtnt to drink pernod if youre sick.

You neither.

It doesnt make any difference with me. It doesnt make any difference
with a woman.

What are you called?

Georgette. How are you called?

Jacob.

Thats a Flemish name.

American too.

Youre not Flamand?

No, American.

Good, I detest Flamands.

By this time we were at the restaurant. I called to the _cocher_ to
stop. We got out and Georgette did not like the looks of the place.
This is no great thing of a restaurant.

No, I said. Maybe you would rather go to Foyots. Why dont you keep
the cab and go on?

I had picked her up because of a vague sentimental idea that it would be
nice to eat with some one. It was a long time since I had dined with a
_poule_, and I had forgotten how dull it could be. We went into the
restaurant, passed Madame Lavigne at the desk and into a little room.
Georgette cheered up a little under the food.

It isnt bad here, she said. It isnt chic, but the food is all
right.

Better than you eat in Lige.

Brussels, you mean.

We had another bottle of wine and Georgette made a joke. She smiled and
showed all her bad teeth, and we touched glasses. Youre not a bad
type, she said. Its a shame youre sick. We get on well. Whats the
matter with you, anyway?

I got hurt in the war, I said.

Oh, that dirty war.

We would probably have gone on and discussed the war and agreed that it
was in reality a calamity for civilization, and perhaps would have been
better avoided. I was bored enough. Just then from the other room some
one called: Barnes! I say, Barnes! Jacob Barnes!

Its a friend calling me, I explained, and went out.

There was Braddocks at a big table with a party: Cohn, Frances Clyne,
Mrs. Braddocks, several people I did not know.

Youre coming to the dance, arent you? Braddocks asked.

What dance?

Why, the dancings. Dont you know weve revived them? Mrs. Braddocks
put in.

You must come, Jake. Were all going, Frances said from the end of the
table. She was tall and had a smile.

Of course, hes coming, Braddocks said. Come in and have coffee with
us, Barnes.

Right.

And bring your friend, said Mrs. Braddocks laughing. She was a
Canadian and had all their easy social graces.

Thanks, well be in, I said. I went back to the small room.

Who are your friends? Georgette asked.

Writers and artists.

There are lots of those on this side of the river.

Too many.

I think so. Still, some of them make money.

Oh, yes.

We finished the meal and the wine. Come on, I said. Were going to
have coffee with the others.

Georgette opened her bag, made a few passes at her face as she looked in
the little mirror, re-defined her lips with the lipstick, and
straightened her hat.

Good, she said.

We went into the room full of people and Braddocks and the men at his
table stood up.

I wish to present my fiance, Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc, I said.
Georgette smiled that wonderful smile, and we shook hands all round.

Are you related to Georgette Leblanc, the singer? Mrs. Braddocks
asked.

Connais pas, Georgette answered.

But you have the same name, Mrs. Braddocks insisted cordially.

No, said Georgette. Not at all. My name is Hobin.

But Mr. Barnes introduced you as Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc. Surely
he did, insisted Mrs. Braddocks, who in the excitement of talking
French was liable to have no idea what she was saying.

Hes a fool, Georgette said.

Oh, it was a joke, then, Mrs. Braddocks said.

Yes, said Georgette. To laugh at.

Did you hear that, Henry? Mrs. Braddocks called down the table to
Braddocks. Mr. Barnes introduced his fiance as Mademoiselle Leblanc,
and her name is actually Hobin.

Of course, darling. Mademoiselle Hobin, Ive known her for a very long
time.

Oh, Mademoiselle Hobin, Frances Clyne called, speaking French very
rapidly and not seeming so proud and astonished as Mrs. Braddocks at its
coming out really French. Have you been in Paris long? Do you like it
here? You love Paris, do you not?

Whos she? Georgette turned to me. Do I have to talk to her?

She turned to Frances, sitting smiling, her hands folded, her head
poised on her long neck, her lips pursed ready to start talking again.

No, I dont like Paris. Its expensive and dirty.

Really? I find it so extraordinarily clean. One of the cleanest cities
in all Europe.

I find it dirty.

How strange! But perhaps you have not been here very long.

Ive been here long enough.

But it does have nice people in it. One must grant that.

Georgette turned to me. You have nice friends.

Frances was a little drunk and would have liked to have kept it up but
the coffee came, and Lavigne with the liqueurs, and after that we all
went out and started for Braddockss dancing-club.

The dancing-club was a _bal musette_ in the Rue de la Montagne Sainte
Genevive. Five nights a week the working people of the Pantheon quarter
danced there. One night a week it was the dancing-club. On Monday nights
it was closed. When we arrived it was quite empty, except for a
policeman sitting near the door, the wife of the proprietor back of the
zinc bar, and the proprietor himself. The daughter of the house came
downstairs as we went in. There were long benches, and tables ran across
the room, and at the far end a dancing-floor.

I wish people would come earlier, Braddocks said. The daughter came up
and wanted to know what we would drink. The proprietor got up on a high
stool beside the dancing-floor and began to play the accordion. He had a
string of bells around one of his ankles and beat time with his foot as
he played. Every one danced. It was hot and we came off the floor
perspiring.

My God, Georgette said. What a box to sweat in!

Its hot.

Hot, my God!

Take off your hat.

Thats a good idea.

Some one asked Georgette to dance, and I went over to the bar. It was
really very hot and the accordion music was pleasant in the hot night. I
drank a beer, standing in the doorway and getting the cool breath of
wind from the street. Two taxis were coming down the steep street. They
both stopped in front of the Bal. A crowd of young men, some in jerseys
and some in their shirt-sleeves, got out. I could see their hands and
newly washed, wavy hair in the light from the door. The policeman
standing by the door looked at me and smiled. They came in. As they went
in, under the light I saw white hands, wavy hair, white faces,
grimacing, gesturing, talking. With them was Brett. She looked very
lovely and she was very much with them.

One of them saw Georgette and said: I do declare. There is an actual
harlot. Im going to dance with her, Lett. You watch me.

The tall dark one, called Lett, said: Dont you be rash.

The wavy blond one answered: Dont you worry, dear. And with them was
Brett.

I was very angry. Somehow they always made me angry. I know they are
supposed to be amusing, and you should be tolerant, but I wanted to
swing on one, any one, anything to shatter that superior, simpering
composure. Instead, I walked down the street and had a beer at the bar
at the next Bal. The beer was not good and I had a worse cognac to take
the taste out of my mouth. When I came back to the Bal there was a crowd
on the floor and Georgette was dancing with the tall blond youth, who
danced big-hippily, carrying his head on one side, his eyes lifted as he
danced. As soon as the music stopped another one of them asked her to
dance. She had been taken up by them. I knew then that they would all
dance with her. They are like that.

I sat down at a table. Cohn was sitting there. Frances was dancing. Mrs.
Braddocks brought up somebody and introduced him as Robert Prentiss. He
was from New York by way of Chicago, and was a rising new novelist. He
had some sort of an English accent. I asked him to have a drink.

Thanks so much, he said, Ive just had one.

Have another.

Thanks, I will then.

We got the daughter of the house over and each had a _fine  leau_.

Youre from Kansas City, they tell me, he said.

Yes.

Do you find Paris amusing?

Yes.

Really?

I was a little drunk. Not drunk in any positive sense but just enough to
be careless.

For Gods sake, I said, yes. Dont you?

Oh, how charmingly you get angry, he said. I wish I had that
faculty.

I got up and walked over toward the dancing-floor. Mrs. Braddocks
followed me. Dont be cross with Robert, she said. Hes still only a
child, you know.

I wasnt cross, I said. I just thought perhaps I was going to throw
up.

Your fiance is having a great success, Mrs. Braddocks looked out on
the floor where Georgette was dancing in the arms of the tall, dark one,
called Lett.

Isnt she? I said.

Rather, said Mrs. Braddocks.

Cohn came up. Come on, Jake, he said, have a drink. We walked over
to the bar. Whats the matter with you? You seem all worked up over
something?

Nothing. This whole show makes me sick is all.

Brett came up to the bar.

Hello, you chaps.

Hello, Brett, I said. Why arent you tight?

Never going to get tight any more. I say, give a chap a brandy and
soda.

She stood holding the glass and I saw Robert Cohn looking at her. He
looked a great deal as his compatriot must have looked when he saw the
promised land. Cohn, of course, was much younger. But he had that look
of eager, deserving expectation.

Brett was damned good-looking. She wore a slipover jersey sweater and a
tweed skirt, and her hair was brushed back like a boys. She started all
that. She was built with curves like the hull of a racing yacht, and you
missed none of it with that wool jersey.

Its a fine crowd youre with, Brett, I said.

Arent they lovely? And you, my dear. Where did you get it?

At the Napolitain.

And have you had a lovely evening?

Oh, priceless, I said.

Brett laughed. Its wrong of you, Jake. Its an insult to all of us.
Look at Frances there, and Jo.

This for Cohns benefit.

Its in restraint of trade, Brett said. She laughed again.

Youre wonderfully sober, I said.

Yes. Arent I? And when ones with the crowd Im with, one can drink in
such safety, too.

The music started and Robert Cohn said: Will you dance this with me,
Lady Brett?

Brett smiled at him. Ive promised to dance this with Jacob, she
laughed. Youve a hell of a biblical name, Jake.

How about the next? asked Cohn.

Were going, Brett said. Weve a date up at Montmartre. Dancing, I
looked over Bretts shoulder and saw Cohn, standing at the bar, still
watching her.

Youve made a new one there, I said to her.

Dont talk about it. Poor chap. I never knew it till just now.

Oh, well, I said. I suppose you like to add them up.

Dont talk like a fool.

You do.

Oh, well. What if I do?

Nothing, I said. We were dancing to the accordion and some one was
playing the banjo. It was hot and I felt happy. We passed close to
Georgette dancing with another one of them.

What possessed you to bring her?

I dont know, I just brought her.

Youre getting damned romantic.

No, bored.

Now?

No, not now.

Lets get out of here. Shes well taken care of.

Do you want to?

Would I ask you if I didnt want to?

We left the floor and I took my coat off a hanger on the wall and put it
on. Brett stood by the bar. Cohn was talking to her. I stopped at the
bar and asked them for an envelope. The patronne found one. I took a
fifty-franc note from my pocket, put it in the envelope, sealed it, and
handed it to the patronne.

If the girl I came with asks for me, will you give her this? I said.
If she goes out with one of those gentlemen, will you save this for
me?

Cest entendu, Monsieur, the patronne said. You go now? So early?

Yes, I said.

We started out the door. Cohn was still talking to Brett. She said good
night and took my arm. Good night, Cohn, I said. Outside in the street
we looked for a taxi.

Youre going to lose your fifty francs, Brett said.

Oh, yes.

No taxis.

We could walk up to the Pantheon and get one.

Come on and well get a drink in the pub next door and send for one.

You wouldnt walk across the street.

Not if I could help it.

We went into the next bar and I sent a waiter for a taxi.

Well, I said, were out away from them.

We stood against the tall zinc bar and did not talk and looked at each
other. The waiter came and said the taxi was outside. Brett pressed my
hand hard. I gave the waiter a franc and we went out. Where should I
tell him? I asked.

Oh, tell him to drive around.

I told the driver to go to the Parc Montsouris, and got in, and slammed
the door. Brett was leaning back in the corner, her eyes closed. I got
in and sat beside her. The cab started with a jerk.

Oh, darling, Ive been so miserable, Brett said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   4


The taxi went up the hill, passed the lighted square, then on into the
dark, still climbing, then levelled out onto a dark street behind St.
Etienne du Mont, went smoothly down the asphalt, passed the trees and
the standing bus at the Place de la Contrescarpe, then turned onto the
cobbles of the Rue Mouffetard. There were lighted bars and late open
shops on each side of the street. We were sitting apart and we jolted
close together going down the old street. Bretts hat was off. Her head
was back. I saw her face in the lights from the open shops, then it was
dark, then I saw her face clearly as we came out on the Avenue des
Gobelins. The street was torn up and men were working on the car-tracks
by the light of acetylene flares. Bretts face was white and the long
line of her neck showed in the bright light of the flares. The street
was dark again and I kissed her. Our lips were tight together and then
she turned away and pressed against the corner of the seat, as far away
as she could get. Her head was down.

Dont touch me, she said. Please dont touch me.

Whats the matter?

I cant stand it.

Oh, Brett.

You mustnt. You must know. I cant stand it, thats all. Oh, darling,
please understand!

Dont you love me?

Love you? I simply turn all to jelly when you touch me.

Isnt there anything we can do about it?

She was sitting up now. My arm was around her and she was leaning back
against me, and we were quite calm. She was looking into my eyes with
that way she had of looking that made you wonder whether she really saw
out of her own eyes. They would look on and on after every one elses
eyes in the world would have stopped looking. She looked as though there
were nothing on earth she would not look at like that, and really she
was afraid of so many things.

And theres not a damn thing we could do, I said.

I dont know, she said. I dont want to go through that hell again.

Wed better keep away from each other.

But, darling, I have to see you. It isnt all that you know.

No, but it always gets to be.

Thats my fault. Dont we pay for all the things we do, though?

She had been looking into my eyes all the time. Her eyes had different
depths, sometimes they seemed perfectly flat. Now you could see all the
way into them.

When I think of the hell Ive put chaps through. Im paying for it all
now.

Dont talk like a fool, I said. Besides, what happened to me is
supposed to be funny. I never think about it.

Oh, no. Ill lay you dont.

Well, lets shut up about it.

I laughed about it too, myself, once. She wasnt looking at me. A
friend of my brothers came home that way from Mons. It seemed like a
hell of a joke. Chaps never know anything, do they?

No, I said. Nobody ever knows anything.

I was pretty well through with the subject. At one time or another I had
probably considered it from most of its various angles, including the
one that certain injuries or imperfections are a subject of merriment
while remaining quite serious for the person possessing them.

Its funny, I said. Its very funny. And its a lot of fun, too, to
be in love.

Do you think so? her eyes looked flat again.

I dont mean fun that way. In a way its an enjoyable feeling.

No, she said. I think its hell on earth.

Its good to see each other.

No. I dont think it is.

Dont you want to?

I have to.

We were sitting now like two strangers. On the right was the Parc
Montsouris. The restaurant where they have the pool of live trout and
where you can sit and look out over the park was closed and dark. The
driver leaned his head around.

Where do you want to go? I asked. Brett turned her head away.

Oh, go to the Select.

Caf Select, I told the driver. Boulevard Montparnasse. We drove
straight down, turning around the Lion de Belfort that guards the
passing Montrouge trams. Brett looked straight ahead. On the Boulevard
Raspail, with the lights of Montparnasse in sight, Brett said: Would
you mind very much if I asked you to do something?

Dont be silly.

Kiss me just once more before we get there.

When the taxi stopped I got out and paid. Brett came out putting on her
hat. She gave me her hand as she stepped down. Her hand was shaky. I
say, do I look too much of a mess? She pulled her mans felt hat down
and started in for the bar. Inside, against the bar and at tables, were
most of the crowd who a been at the dance.

Hello, you chaps, Brett said. Im going to have a drink.

Oh, Brett! Brett! the little Greek portrait-painter, who called
himself a duke, and whom everybody called Zizi, pushed up to her. I got
something fine to tell you.

Hello, Zizi, Brett said.

I want you to meet a friend, Zizi said. A fat man came up.

Count Mippipopolous, meet my friend Lady Ashley.

How do you do? said Brett.

Well, does your Ladyship have a good time here in Paris? asked Count
Mippipopolous, who wore an elks tooth on his watch-chain.

Rather, said Brett.

Paris is a fine town all right, said the count. But I guess you have
pretty big doings yourself over in London.

Oh, yes, said Brett. Enormous.

Braddocks called to me from a table. Barnes, he said, have a drink.
That girl of yours got in a frightful row.

What about?

Something the patronnes daughter said. A corking row. She was rather
splendid, you know. Showed her yellow card and demanded the patronnes
daughters too. I say it was a row.

What finally happened?

Oh, some one took her home. Not a bad-looking girl. Wonderful command
of the idiom. Do stay and have a drink.

No, I said. I must shove off. Seen Cohn?

He went home with Frances, Mrs. Braddock put in.

Poor chap, he looks awfully down, Braddocks said.

I dare say he is, said Mrs. Braddocks.

I have to shove off, I said. Good night.

I said good night to Brett at the bar. The count was buying champagne.
Will you take a glass of wine with us, sir? he asked.

No. Thanks awfully. I have to go.

Really going? Brett asked.

Yes, I said. Ive got a rotten headache.

Ill see you to-morrow?

Come in at the office.

Hardly.

Well, where will I see you?

Anywhere around five oclock.

Make it the other side of town then.

Good. Ill be at the Crillon at five.

Try and be there, I said.

Dont worry, Brett said. Ive never let you down, have I?

Heard from Mike?

Letter to-day.

Good night, sir, said the count.

I went out onto the sidewalk and walked down toward the Boulevard St.
Michel, passed the tables of the Rotonde, still crowded, looked across
the street at the Dome, its tables running out to the edge of the
pavement. Some one waved at me from a table, I did not see who it was
and went on. I wanted to get home. The Boulevard Montparnasse was
deserted. Lavignes was closed tight, and they were stacking the tables
outside the Closerie des Lilas. I passed Neys statue standing among the
new-leaved chestnut-trees in the arc-light. There was a faded purple
wreath leaning against the base. I stopped and read the inscription:
from the Bonapartist Groups, some date; I forget. He looked very fine,
Marshal Ney in his top-boots, gesturing with his sword among the green
new horse-chestnut leaves. My flat was just across the street, a little
way down the Boulevard St. Michel.

There was a light in the concierges room and I knocked on the door and
she gave me my mail. I wished her good night and went up-stairs. There
were two letters and some papers. I looked at them under the gas-light
in the dining-room. The letters were from the States. One was a bank
statement. It showed a balance of $2432.60. I got out my check-book and
deducted four checks drawn since the first of the month, and discovered
I had a balance of $1832.60. I wrote this on the back of the statement.
The other letter was a wedding announcement. Mr. and Mrs. Aloysius Kirby
announce the marriage of their daughter KatherineI knew neither the
girl nor the man she was marrying. They must be circularizing the town.
It was a funny name. I felt sure I could remember anybody with a name
like Aloysius. It was a good Catholic name. There was a crest on the
announcement. Like Zizi the Greek duke. And that count. The count was
funny. Brett had a title, too. Lady Ashley. To hell with Brett. To hell
with you, Lady Ashley.

I lit the lamp beside the bed, turned off the gas, and opened the wide
windows. The bed was far back from the windows, and I sat with the
windows open and undressed by the bed. Outside a night train, running on
the street-car tracks, went by carrying vegetables to the markets. They
were noisy at night when you could not sleep. Undressing, I looked at
myself in the mirror of the big armoire beside the bed. That was a
typically French way to furnish a room. Practical, too, I suppose. Of
all the ways to be wounded. I suppose it was funny. I put on my pajamas
and got into bed. I had the two bull-fight papers, and I took their
wrappers off. One was orange. The other yellow. They would both have the
same news, so whichever I read first would spoil the other. _Le Toril_
was the better paper, so I started to read it. I read it all the way
through, including the Petite Correspondance and the Cornigrams. I blew
out the lamp. Perhaps I would be able to sleep.

My head started to work. The old grievance. Well, it was a rotten way to
be wounded and flying on a joke front like the Italian. In the Italian
hospital we were going to form a society. It had a funny name in
Italian. I wonder what became of the others, the Italians. That was in
the Ospedale Maggiore in Milano, Padiglione Ponte. The next building was
the Padiglione Zonda. There was a statue of Ponte, or maybe it was
Zonda. That was where the liaison colonel came to visit me. That was
funny. That was about the first funny thing. I was all bandaged up. But
they had told him about it. Then he made that wonderful speech: You, a
foreigner, an Englishman (any foreigner was an Englishman) have given
more than your life. What a speech! I would like to have it illuminated
to hang in the office. He never laughed. He was putting himself in my
place, I guess. Che mala fortuna! Che mala fortuna!

I never used to realize it, I guess. I try and play it along and just
not make trouble for people. Probably I never would have had any trouble
if I hadnt run into Brett when they shipped me to England. I suppose
she only wanted what she couldnt have. Well, people were that way. To
hell with people. The Catholic Church had an awfully good way of
handling all that. Good advice, anyway. Not to think about it. Oh, it
was swell advice. Try and take it sometime. Try and take it.

I lay awake thinking and my mind jumping around. Then I couldnt keep
away from it, and I started to think about Brett and all the rest of it
went away. I was thinking about Brett and my mind stopped jumping around
and started to go in sort of smooth waves. Then all of a sudden I
started to cry. Then after a while it was better and I lay in bed and
listened to the heavy trams go by and way down the street, and then I
went to sleep.

I woke up. There was a row going on outside. I listened and I thought I
recognized a voice. I put on a dressing-gown and went to the door. The
concierge was talking down-stairs. She was very angry. I heard my name
and called down the stairs.

Is that you, Monsieur Barnes? the concierge called.

Yes. Its me.

Theres a species of woman here whos waked the whole street up. What
kind of a dirty business at this time of night! She says she must see
you. Ive told her youre asleep.

Then I heard Bretts voice. Half asleep I had been sure it was
Georgette. I dont know why. She could not have known my address.

Will you send her up, please?

Brett came up the stairs. I saw she was quite drunk. Silly thing to
do, she said. Make an awful row. I say, you werent asleep, were you?

What did you think I was doing?

Dont know. What time is it?

I looked at the clock. It was half-past four. Had no idea what hour it
was, Brett said. I say, can a chap sit down? Dont be cross, darling.
Just left the count. He brought me here.

Whats he like? I was getting brandy and soda and glasses.

Just a little, said Brett. Dont try and make me drunk. The count?
Oh, rather. Hes quite one of us.

Is he a count?

Heres how. I rather think so, you know. Deserves to be, anyhow. Knows
hells own amount about people. Dont know where he got it all. Owns a
chain of sweetshops in the States.

She sipped at her glass.

Think he called it a chain. Something like that. Linked them all up.
Told me a little about it. Damned interesting. Hes one of us, though.
Oh, quite. No doubt. One can always tell.

She took another drink.

How do I buck on about all this? You dont mind, do you? Hes putting
up for Zizi, you know.

Is Zizi really a duke, too?

I shouldnt wonder. Greek, you know. Rotten painter. I rather liked the
count.

Where did you go with him?

Oh, everywhere. He just brought me here now. Offered me ten thousand
dollars to go to Biarritz with him. How much is that in pounds?

Around two thousand.

Lot of money. I told him I couldnt do it. He was awfully nice about
it. Told him I knew too many people in Biarritz.

Brett laughed.

I say, you are slow on the up-take, she said. I had only sipped my
brandy and soda. I took a long drink.

Thats better. Very funny, Brett said. Then he wanted me to go to
Cannes with him. Told him I knew too many people in Cannes. Monte Carlo.
Told him I knew too many people in Monte Carlo. Told him I knew too many
people everywhere. Quite true, too. So I asked him to bring me here.

She looked at me, her hand on the table, her glass raised. Dont look
like that, she said. Told him I was in love with you. True, too. Dont
look like that. He was damn nice about it. Wants to drive us out to
dinner to-morrow night. Like to go?

Why not?

Id better go now.

Why?

Just wanted to see you. Damned silly idea. Want to get dressed and come
down? Hes got the car just up the street.

The count?

Himself. And a chauffeur in livery. Going to drive me around and have
breakfast in the Bois. Hampers. Got it all at Zellis. Dozen bottles of
Mumms. Tempt you?

I have to work in the morning, I said. Im too far behind you now to
catch up and be any fun.

Dont be an ass.

Cant do it.

Right. Send him a tender message?

Anything. Absolutely.

Good night, darling.

Dont be sentimental.

You make me ill.

We kissed good night and Brett shivered. Id better go, she said.
Good night, darling.

You dont have to go.

Yes.

We kissed again on the stairs and as I called for the cordon the
concierge muttered something behind her door. I went back up-stairs and
from the open window watched Brett walking up the street to the big
limousine drawn up to the curb under the arc-light. She got in and it
started off. I turned around. On the table was an empty glass and a
glass half-full of brandy and soda. I took them both out to the kitchen
and poured the half-full glass down the sink. I turned off the gas in
the dining-room, kicked off my slippers sitting on the bed, and got into
bed. This was Brett, that I had felt like crying about. Then I thought
of her walking up the street and stepping into the car, as I had last
seen her, and of course in a little while I felt like hell again. It is
awfully easy to be hard-boiled about everything in the daytime, but at
night it is another thing.




                                CHAPTER
                                   5


In the morning I walked down the Boulevard to the rue Soufflot for
coffee and brioche. It was a fine morning. The horse-chestnut trees in
the Luxembourg gardens were in bloom. There was the pleasant
early-morning feeling of a hot day. I read the papers with the coffee
and then smoked a cigarette. The flower-women were coming up from the
market and arranging their daily stock. Students went by going up to the
law school, or down to the Sorbonne. The Boulevard was busy with trams
and people going to work. I got on an S bus and rode down to the
Madeleine, standing on the back platform. From the Madeleine I walked
along the Boulevard des Capucines to the Opra, and up to my office. I
passed the man with the jumping frogs and the man with the boxer toys. I
stepped aside to avoid walking into the thread with which his girl
assistant manipulated the boxers. She was standing looking away, the
thread in her folded hands. The man was urging two tourists to buy.
Three more tourists had stopped and were watching. I walked on behind a
man who was pushing a roller that printed the name CINZANO on the
sidewalk in damp letters. All along people were going to work. It felt
pleasant to be going to work. I walked across the avenue and turned in
to my office.

Up-stairs in the office I read the French morning papers, smoked, and
then sat at the typewriter and got off a good mornings work. At eleven
oclock I went over to the Quai dOrsay in a taxi and went in and sat
with about a dozen correspondents, while the foreign-office mouthpiece,
a young Nouvelle Revue Franaise diplomat in horn-rimmed spectacles,
talked and answered questions for half an hour. The President of the
Council was in Lyons making a speech, or, rather he was on his way back.
Several people asked questions to hear themselves talk and there were a
couple of questions asked by news service men who wanted to know the
answers. There was no news. I shared a taxi back from the Quai dOrsay
with Woolsey and Krum.

What do you do nights, Jake? asked Krum. I never see you around.

Oh, Im over in the Quarter.

Im coming over some night. The Dingo. Thats the great place, isnt
it?

Yes. That, or this new dive, The Select.

Ive meant to get over, said Krum. You know how it is, though, with a
wife and kids.

Playing any tennis? Woolsey asked.

Well, no, said Krum. I cant say Ive played any this year. Ive
tried to get away, but Sundays its always rained, and the courts are so
damned crowded.

The Englishmen all have Saturday off, Woolsey said.

Lucky beggars, said Krum. Well, Ill tell you. Some day Im not going
to be working for an agency. Then Ill have plenty of time to get out in
the country.

Thats the thing to do. Live out in the country and have a little car.

Ive been thinking some about getting a car next year.

I banged on the glass. The chauffeur stopped. Heres my street, I
said. Come in and have a drink.

Thanks, old man, Krum said. Woolsey shook his head. Ive got to file
that line he got off this morning.

I put a two-franc piece in Krums hand.

Youre crazy, Jake, he said. This is on me.

Its all on the office, anyway.

Nope. I want to get it.

I waved good-by. Krum put his head out. See you at the lunch on
Wednesday.

You bet.

I went to the office in the elevator. Robert Cohn was waiting for me.
Hello, Jake, he said. Going out to lunch?

Yes. Let me see if there is anything new.

Where will we eat?

Anywhere.

I was looking over my desk. Where do you want to eat?

How about Wetzels? Theyve got good hors duvres.

In the restaurant we ordered hors duvres and beer. The sommelier
brought the beer, tall, beaded on the outside of the steins, and cold.
There were a dozen different dishes of hors duvres.

Have any fun last night? I asked.

No. I dont think so.

Hows the writing going?

Rotten. I cant get this second book going.

That happens to everybody.

Oh, Im sure of that. It gets me worried, though.

Thought any more about going to South America?

I mean that.

Well, why dont you start off?

Frances.

Well, I said, take her with you.

She wouldnt like it. That isnt the sort of thing she likes. She likes
a lot of people around.

Tell her to go to hell.

I cant. Ive got certain obligations to her.

He shoved the sliced cucumbers away and took a pickled herring.

What do you know about Lady Brett Ashley, Jake?

Her names Lady Ashley. Bretts her own name. Shes a nice girl, I
said. Shes getting a divorce and shes going to marry Mike Campbell.
Hes over in Scotland now. Why?

Shes a remarkably attractive woman.

Isnt she?

Theres a certain quality about her, a certain fineness. She seems to
be absolutely fine and straight.

Shes very nice.

I dont know how to describe the quality, Cohn said. I suppose its
breeding.

You sound as though you liked her pretty well.

I do. I shouldnt wonder if I were in love with her.

Shes a drunk, I said. Shes in love with Mike Campbell, and shes
going to marry him. Hes going to be rich as hell some day.

I dont believe shell ever marry him.

Why not?

I dont know. I just dont believe it. Have you known her a long time?

Yes, I said. She was a V. A. D. in a hospital I was in during the
war.

She must have been just a kid then.

Shes thirty-four now.

When did she marry Ashley?

During the war. Her own true love had just kicked off with the
dysentery.

You talk sort of bitter.

Sorry. I didnt mean to. I was just trying to give you the facts.

I dont believe she would marry anybody she didnt love.

Well, I said. Shes done it twice.

I dont believe it.

Well, I said, dont ask me a lot of fool questions if you dont like
the answers.

I didnt ask you that.

You asked me what I knew about Brett Ashley.

I didnt ask you to insult her.

Oh, go to hell.

He stood up from the table his face white, and stood there white and
angry behind the little plates of hors duvres.

Sit down, I said. Dont be a fool.

Youve got to take that back.

Oh, cut out the prep-school stuff.

Take it back.

Sure. Anything. I never heard of Brett Ashley. Hows that?

No. Not that. About me going to hell.

Oh, dont go to hell, I said. Stick around. Were just starting
lunch.

Cohn smiled again and sat down. He seemed glad to sit down. What the
hell would he have done if he hadnt sat down? You say such damned
insulting things, Jake.

Im sorry. Ive got a nasty tongue. I never mean it when I say nasty
things.

I know it, Cohn said. Youre really about the best friend I have,
Jake.

God help you, I thought. Forget what I said, I said out loud. Im
sorry.

Its all right. Its fine. I was just sore for a minute.

Good. Lets get something else to eat.

After we finished the lunch we walked up to the Caf de la Paix and had
coffee. I could feel Cohn wanted to bring up Brett again, but I held him
off it. We talked about one thing and another, and I left him to come to
the office.




                                CHAPTER
                                   6


At five oclock I was in the Hotel Crillon waiting for Brett. She was
not there, so I sat down and wrote some letters. They were not very good
letters but I hoped their being on Crillon stationery would help them.
Brett did not turn up, so about quarter to six I went down to the bar
and had a Jack Rose with George the barman. Brett had not been in the
bar either, and so I looked for her up-stairs on my way out, and took a
taxi to the Caf Select. Crossing the Seine I saw a string of barges
being towed empty down the current, riding high, the bargemen at the
sweeps as they came toward the bridge. The river looked nice. It was
always pleasant crossing bridges in Paris.

The taxi rounded the statue of the inventor of the semaphore engaged in
doing same, and turned up the Boulevard Raspail, and I sat back to let
that part of the ride pass. The Boulevard Raspail always made dull
riding. It was like a certain stretch on the P. L. M. between
Fontainebleau and Montereau that always made me feel bored and dead and
dull until it was over. I suppose it is some association of ideas that
makes those dead places in a journey. There are other streets in Paris
as ugly as the Boulevard Raspail. It is a street I do not mind walking
down at all. But I cannot stand to ride along it. Perhaps I had read
something about it once. That was the way Robert Cohn was about all of
Paris. I wondered where Cohn got that incapacity to enjoy Paris.
Possibly from Mencken. Mencken hates Paris, I believe. So many young men
get their likes and dislikes from Mencken.

The taxi stopped in front of the Rotonde. No matter what caf in
Montparnasse you ask a taxi-driver to bring you to from the right bank
of the river, they always take you to the Rotonde. Ten years from now it
will probably be the Dome. It was near enough, anyway. I walked past the
sad tables of the Rotonde to the Select. There were a few people inside
at the bar, and outside, alone, sat Harvey Stone. He had a pile of
saucers in front of him, and he needed a shave.

Sit down, said Harvey, Ive been looking for you.

Whats the matter?

Nothing. Just looking for you.

Been out to the races?

No. Not since Sunday.

What do you hear from the States?

Nothing. Absolutely nothing.

Whats the matter?

I dont know. Im through with them. Im absolutely through with them.

He leaned forward and looked me in the eye.

Do you want to know something, Jake?

Yes.

I havent had anything to eat for five days.

I figured rapidly back in my mind. It was three days ago that Harvey had
won two hundred francs from me shaking poker dice in the New York Bar.

Whats the matter?

No money. Money hasnt come, he paused. I tell you its strange,
Jake. When Im like this I just want to be alone. I want to stay in my
own room. Im like a cat.

I felt in my pocket.

Would a hundred help you any, Harvey?

Yes.

Come on. Lets go and eat.

Theres no hurry. Have a drink.

Better eat.

No. When I get like this I dont care whether I eat or not.

We had a drink. Harvey added my saucer to his own pile.

Do you know Mencken, Harvey?

Yes. Why?

Whats he like?

Hes all right. He says some pretty funny things. Last time I had
dinner with him we talked about Hoffenheimer. The trouble is, he said,
hes a garter snapper. Thats not bad.

Thats not bad.

Hes through now, Harvey went on. Hes written about all the things
he knows, and now hes on all the things he doesnt know.

I guess hes all right, I said. I just cant read him.

Oh, nobody reads him now, Harvey said, except the people that used to
read the Alexander Hamilton Institute.

Well, I said. That was a good thing, too.

Sure, said Harvey. So we sat and thought deeply for a while.

Have another port?

All right, said Harvey.

There comes Cohn, I said. Robert Cohn was crossing the street.

That moron, said Harvey. Cohn came up to our table.

Hello, you bums, he said.

Hello, Robert, Harvey said. I was just telling Jake here that youre
a moron.

What do you mean?

Tell us right off. Dont think. What would you rather do if you could
do anything you wanted?

Cohn started to consider.

Dont think. Bring it right out.

I dont know, Cohn said. Whats it all about, anyway?

I mean what would you rather do. What comes into your head first. No
matter how silly it is.

I dont know, Cohn said. I think Id rather play football again with
what I know about handling myself, now.

I misjudged you, Harvey said. Youre not a moron. Youre only a case
of arrested development.

Youre awfully funny, Harvey, Cohn said. Some day somebody will push
your face in.

Harvey Stone laughed. You think so. They wont, though. Because it
wouldnt make any difference to me. Im not a fighter.

It would make a difference to you if anybody did it.

No, it wouldnt. Thats where you make your big mistake. Because youre
not intelligent.

Cut it out about me.

Sure, said Harvey. It doesnt make any difference to me. You dont
mean anything to me.

Come on, Harvey, I said. Have another porto.

No, he said. Im going up the street and eat. See you later, Jake.

He walked out and up the street. I watched him crossing the street
through the taxis, small, heavy, slowly sure of himself in the traffic.

He always gets me sore, Cohn said. I cant stand him.

I like him, I said. Im fond of him. You dont want to get sore at
him.

I know it, Cohn said. He just gets on my nerves.

Write this afternoon?

No. I couldnt get it going. Its harder to do than my first book. Im
having a hard time handling it.

The sort of healthy conceit that he had when he returned from America
early in the spring was gone. Then he had been sure of his work, only
with these personal longings for adventure. Now the sureness was gone.
Somehow I feel I have not shown Robert Cohn clearly. The reason is that
until he fell in love with Brett, I never heard him make one remark that
would, in any way, detach him from other people. He was nice to watch on
the tennis-court, he had a good body, and he kept it in shape; he
handled his cards well at bridge, and he had a funny sort of
undergraduate quality about him. If he were in a crowd nothing he said
stood out. He wore what used to be called polo shirts at school, and may
be called that still, but he was not professionally youthful. I do not
believe he thought about his clothes much. Externally he had been formed
at Princeton. Internally he had been moulded by the two women who had
trained him. He had a nice, boyish sort of cheerfulness that had never
been trained out of him, and I probably have not brought it out. He
loved to win at tennis. He probably loved to win as much as Lenglen, for
instance. On the other hand, he was not angry at being beaten. When he
fell in love with Brett his tennis game went all to pieces. People beat
him who had never had a chance with him. He was very nice about it.

Anyhow, we were sitting on the terrace of the Caf Select, and Harvey
Stone had just crossed the street.

Come on up to the Lilas, I said.

I have a date.

What time?

Frances is coming here at seven-fifteen.

There she is.

Frances Clyne was coming toward us from across the street. She was a
very tall girl who walked with a great deal of movement. She waved and
smiled. We watched her cross the street.

Hello, she said, Im so glad youre here, Jake. Ive been wanting to
talk to you.

Hello, Frances, said Cohn. He smiled.

Why, hello, Robert. Are you here? She went on, talking rapidly. Ive
had the darndest time. This oneshaking her head at Cohndidnt come
home for lunch.

I wasnt supposed to.

Oh, I know. But you didnt say anything about it to the cook. Then I
had a date myself, and Paula wasnt at her office. I went to the Ritz
and waited for her, and she never came, and of course I didnt have
enough money to lunch at the Ritz

What did you do?

Oh, went out, of course. She spoke in a sort of imitation joyful
manner. I always keep my appointments. No one keeps theirs, nowadays. I
ought to know better. How are you, Jake, anyway?

Fine.

That was a fine girl you had at the dance, and then went off with that
Brett one.

Dont you like her? Cohn asked.

I think shes perfectly charming. Dont you?

Cohn said nothing.

Look, Jake. I want to talk with you. Would you come over with me to the
Dome? Youll stay here, wont you, Robert? Come on, Jake.

We crossed the Boulevard Montparnasse and sat down at a table. A boy
came up with the _Paris Times_, and I bought one and opened it.

Whats the matter, Frances?

Oh, nothing, she said, except that he wants to leave me.

How do you mean?

Oh, he told every one that we were going to be married, and I told my
mother and every one, and now he doesnt want to do it.

Whats the matter?

Hes decided he hasnt lived enough. I knew it would happen when he
went to New York.

She looked up, very bright-eyed and trying to talk inconsequentially.

I wouldnt marry him if he doesnt want to. Of course I wouldnt. I
wouldnt marry him now for anything. But it does seem to me to be a
little late now, after weve waited three years, and Ive just gotten my
divorce.

I said nothing.

We were going to celebrate so, and instead weve just had scenes. Its
so childish. We have dreadful scenes, and he cries and begs me to be
reasonable, but he says he just cant do it.

Its rotten luck.

I should say it is rotten luck. Ive wasted two years and a half on him
now. And I dont know now if any man will ever want to marry me. Two
years ago I could have married anybody I wanted, down at Cannes. All the
old ones that wanted to marry somebody chic and settle down were crazy
about me. Now I dont think I could get anybody.

Sure, you could marry anybody.

No, I dont believe it. And Im fond of him, too. And Id like to have
children. I always thought wed have children.

She looked at me very brightly. I never liked children much, but I
dont want to think Ill never have them. I always thought Id have them
and then like them.

Hes got children.

Oh, yes. Hes got children, and hes got money, and hes got a rich
mother, and hes written a book, and nobody will publish my stuff;
nobody at all. It isnt bad, either. And I havent got any money at all.
I could have had alimony, but I got the divorce the quickest way.

She looked at me again very brightly.

It isnt right. Its my own fault and its not, too. I ought to have
known better. And when I tell him he just cries and says he cant marry.
Why cant he marry? Id be a good wife. Im easy to get along with. I
leave him alone. It doesnt do any good.

Its a rotten shame.

Yes, it is a rotten shame. But theres no use talking about it, is
there? Come on, lets go back to the caf.

And of course there isnt anything I can do.

No. Just dont let him know I talked to you. I know what he wants. Now
for the first time she dropped her bright, terribly cheerful manner. He
wants to go back to New York alone, and be there when his book comes out
so when a lot of little chickens like it. Thats what he wants.

Maybe they wont like it. I dont think hes that way. Really.

You dont know him like I do, Jake. Thats what he wants to do. I know
it. I know it. Thats why he doesnt want to marry. He wants to have a
big triumph this fall all by himself.

Want to go back to the caf?

Yes. Come on.

We got up from the tablethey had never brought us a drinkand started
across the street toward the Select, where Cohn sat smiling at us from
behind the marble-topped table.

Well, what are you smiling at? Frances asked him. Feel pretty happy?

I was smiling at you and Jake with your secrets.

Oh, what Ive told Jake isnt any secret. Everybody will know it soon
enough. I only wanted to give Jake a decent version.

What was it? About your going to England?

Yes, about my going to England. Oh, Jake! I forgot to tell you. Im
going to England.

Isnt that fine!

Yes, thats the way its done in the very best families. Roberts
sending me. Hes going to give me two hundred pounds and then Im going
to visit friends. Wont it be lovely? The friends dont know about it,
yet.

She turned to Cohn and smiled at him. He was not smiling now.

You were only going to give me a hundred pounds, werent you, Robert?
But I made him give me two hundred. Hes really very generous. Arent
you, Robert?

I do not know how people could say such terrible things to Robert Cohn.
There are people to whom you could not say insulting things. They give
you a feeling that the world would be destroyed, would actually be
destroyed before your eyes, if you said certain things. But here was
Cohn taking it all. Here it was, all going on right before me, and I did
not even feel an impulse to try and stop it. And this was friendly
joking to what went on later.

How can you say such things, Frances? Cohn interrupted.

Listen to him. Im going to England. Im going to visit friends. Ever
visit friends that didnt want you? Oh, theyll have to take me, all
right. How do you do, my dear? Such a long time since weve seen you.
And how is your dear mother? Yes, how is my dear mother? She put all
her money into French war bonds. Yes, she did. Probably the only person
in the world that did. And what about Robert? or else very careful
talking around Robert. You must be most careful not to mention him, my
dear. Poor Frances has had a most unfortunate experience. Wont it be
fun, Robert? Dont you think it will be fun, Jake?

She turned to me with that terribly bright smile. It was very
satisfactory to her to have an audience for this.

And where are you going to be, Robert? Its my own fault, all right.
Perfectly my own fault. When I made you get rid of your little secretary
on the magazine I ought to have known youd get rid of me the same way.
Jake doesnt know about that. Should I tell him?

Shut up, Frances, for Gods sake.

Yes, Ill tell him. Robert had a little secretary on the magazine. Just
the sweetest little thing in the world, and he thought she was
wonderful, and then I came along and he thought I was pretty wonderful,
too. So I made him get rid of her, and he had brought her to
Provincetown from Carmel when he moved the magazine, and he didnt even
pay her fare back to the coast. All to please me. He thought I was
pretty fine, then. Didnt you, Robert?

You mustnt misunderstand, Jake, it was absolutely platonic with the
secretary. Not even platonic. Nothing at all, really. It was just that
she was so nice. And he did that just to please me. Well, I suppose that
we that live by the sword shall perish by the sword. Isnt that
literary, though? You want to remember that for your next book, Robert.

You know Robert is going to get material for a new book. Arent you,
Robert? Thats why hes leaving me. Hes decided I dont film well. You
see, he was so busy all the time that we were living together, writing
on this book, that he doesnt remember anything about us. So now hes
going out and get some new material. Well, I hope he gets something
frightfully interesting.

Listen, Robert, dear. Let me tell you something. You wont mind, will
you? Dont have scenes with your young ladies. Try not to. Because you
cant have scenes without crying, and then you pity yourself so much you
cant remember what the other persons said. Youll never be able to
remember any conversations that way. Just try and be calm. I know its
awfully hard. But remember, its for literature. We all ought to make
sacrifices for literature. Look at me. Im going to England without a
protest. All for literature. We must all help young writers. Dont you
think so, Jake? But youre not a young writer. Are you, Robert? Youre
thirty-four. Still, I suppose that is young for a great writer. Look at
Hardy. Look at Anatole France. He just died a little while ago. Robert
doesnt think hes any good, though. Some of his French friends told
him. He doesnt read French very well himself. He wasnt a good writer
like you are, was he, Robert? Do you think he ever had to go and look
for material? What do you suppose he said to his mistresses when he
wouldnt marry them? I wonder if he cried, too? Oh, Ive just thought of
something. She put her gloved hand up to her lips. I know the real
reason why Robert wont marry me, Jake. Its just come to me. Theyve
sent it to me in a vision in the Caf Select. Isnt it mystic? Some day
theyll put a tablet up. Like at Lourdes. Do you want to hear, Robert?
Ill tell you. Its so simple. I wonder why I never thought about it.
Why, you see, Roberts always wanted to have a mistress, and if he
doesnt marry me, why, then hes had one. She was his mistress for over
two years. See how it is? And if he marries me, like hes always
promised he would, that would be the end of all the romance. Dont you
think thats bright of me to figure that out? Its true, too. Look at
him and see if its not. Where are you going, Jake?

Ive got to go in and see Harvey Stone a minute.

Cohn looked up as I went in. His face was white. Why did he sit there?
Why did he keep on taking it like that?

As I stood against the bar looking out I could see them through the
window. Frances was talking on to him, smiling brightly, looking into
his face each time she asked: Isnt it so, Robert? Or maybe she did
not ask that now. Perhaps she said something else. I told the barman I
did not want anything to drink and went out through the side door. As I
went out the door I looked back through the two thicknesses of glass and
saw them sitting there. She was still talking to him. I went down a side
street to the Boulevard Raspail. A taxi came along and I got in and gave
the driver the address of my flat.




                                CHAPTER
                                   7


As I started up the stairs the concierge knocked on the glass of the
door of her lodge, and as I stopped she came out. She had some letters
and a telegram.

Here is the post. And there was a lady here to see you.

Did she leave a card?

No. She was with a gentleman. It was the one who was here last night.
In the end I find she is very nice.

Was she with a friend of mine?

I dont know. He was never here before. He was very large. Very, very
large. She was very nice. Very, very nice. Last night she was, perhaps,
a little She put her head on one hand and rocked it up and down.
Ill speak perfectly frankly, Monsieur Barnes. Last night I found her
not so gentille. Last night I formed another idea of her. But listen to
what I tell you. She is trs, trs gentille. She is of very good family.
It is a thing you can see.

They did not leave any word?

Yes. They said they would be back in an hour.

Send them up when they come.

Yes, Monsieur Barnes. And that lady, that lady there is some one. An
eccentric, perhaps, but quelquune, quelquune!

The concierge, before she became a concierge, had owned a drink-selling
concession at the Paris race-courses. Her life-work lay in the pelouse,
but she kept an eye on the people of the pesage, and she took great
pride in telling me which of my guests were well brought up, which were
of good family, who were sportsmen, a French word pronounced with the
accent on the men. The only trouble was that people who did not fall
into any of those three categories were very liable to be told there was
no one home, chez Barnes. One of my friends, an extremely
underfed-looking painter, who was obviously to Madame Duzinell neither
well brought up, of good family, nor a sportsman, wrote me a letter
asking if I could get him a pass to get by the concierge so he could
come up and see me occasionally in the evenings.

I went up to the flat wondering what Brett had done to the concierge.
The wire was a cable from Bill Gorton, saying he was arriving on the
_France_. I put the mail on the table, went back to the bedroom,
undressed and had a shower. I was rubbing down when I heard the
door-bell pull. I put on a bathrobe and slippers and went to the door.
It was Brett. Back of her was the count. He was holding a great bunch of
roses.

Hello, darling, said Brett. Arent you going to let us in?

Come on. I was just bathing.

Arent you the fortunate man. Bathing.

Only a shower. Sit down, Count Mippipopolous. What will you drink?

I dont know whether you like flowers, sir, the count said, but I
took the liberty of just bringing these roses.

Here, give them to me. Brett took them. Get me some water in this,
Jake. I filled the big earthenware jug with water in the kitchen, and
Brett put the roses in it, and placed them in the centre of the
dining-room table.

I say. We have had a day.

You dont remember anything about a date with me at the Crillon?

No. Did we have one? I must have been blind.

You were quite drunk, my dear, said the count.

Wasnt I, though? And the counts been a brick, absolutely.

Youve got hells own drag with the concierge now.

I ought to have. Gave her two hundred francs.

Dont be a damned fool.

His, she said, and nodded at the count.

I thought we ought to give her a little something for last night. It
was very late.

Hes wonderful, Brett said. He remembers everything thats happened.

So do you, my dear.

Fancy, said Brett. Whod want to? I say, Jake, _do_ we get a drink?

You get it while I go in and dress. You know where it is.

Rather.

While I dressed I heard Brett put down glasses and then a siphon, and
then heard them talking. I dressed slowly, sitting on the bed. I felt
tired and pretty rotten. Brett came in the room, a glass in her hand,
and sat on the bed.

Whats the matter, darling? Do you feel rocky?

She kissed me coolly on the forehead.

Oh, Brett, I love you so much.

Darling, she said. Then: Do you want me to send him away?

No. Hes nice.

Ill send him away.

No, dont.

Yes, Ill send him away.

You cant just like that.

Cant I, though? You stay here. Hes mad about me, I tell you.

She was gone out of the room. I lay face down on the bed. I was having a
bad time. I heard them talking but I did not listen. Brett came in and
sat on the bed.

Poor old darling. She stroked my head.

What did you say to him? I was lying with my face away from her. I did
not want to see her.

Sent him for champagne. He loves to go for champagne.

Then later: Do you feel better, darling? Is the head any better?

Its better.

Lie quiet. Hes gone to the other side of town.

Couldnt we live together, Brett? Couldnt we just live together?

I dont think so. Id just _tromper_ you with everybody. You couldnt
stand it.

I stand it now.

That would be different. Its my fault, Jake. Its the way Im made.

Couldnt we go off in the country for a while?

It wouldnt be any good. Ill go if you like. But I couldnt live
quietly in the country. Not with my own true love.

I know.

Isnt it rotten? There isnt any use my telling you I love you.

You know I love you.

Lets not talk. Talkings all bilge. Im going away from you, and then
Michaels coming back.

Why are you going away?

Better for you. Better for me.

When are you going?

Soon as I can.

Where?

San Sebastian.

Cant we go together?

No. That would be a hell of an idea after wed just talked it out.

We never agreed.

Oh, you know as well as I do. Dont be obstinate, darling.

Oh, sure, I said. I know youre right. Im just low, and when Im low
I talk like a fool.

I sat up, leaned over, found my shoes beside the bed and put them on. I
stood up.

Dont look like that, darling.

How do you want me to look?

Oh, dont be a fool. Im going away to-morrow.

To-morrow?

Yes. Didnt I say so? I am.

Lets have a drink, then. The count will be back.

Yes. He should be back. You know hes extraordinary about buying
champagne. It means any amount to him.

We went into the dining-room. I took up the brandy bottle and poured
Brett a drink and one for myself. There was a ring at the bell-pull. I
went to the door and there was the count. Behind him was the chauffeur
carrying a basket of champagne.

Where should I have him put it, sir? asked the count.

In the kitchen, Brett said.

Put it in there, Henry, the count motioned. Now go down and get the
ice. He stood looking after the basket inside the kitchen door. I
think youll find thats very good wine, he said. I know we dont get
much of a chance to judge good wine in the States now, but I got this
from a friend of mine thats in the business.

Oh, you always have some one in the trade, Brett said.

This fellow raises the grapes. Hes got thousands of acres of them.

Whats his name? asked Brett. Veuve Cliquot?

No, said the count. Mumms. Hes a baron.

Isnt it wonderful, said Brett. We all have titles. Why havent you a
title, Jake?

I assure you, sir, the count put his hand on my arm. It never does a
man any good. Most of the time it costs you money.

Oh, I dont know. Its damned useful sometimes, Brett said.

Ive never known it to do me any good.

You havent used it properly. Ive had hells own amount of credit on
mine.

Do sit down, count, I said. Let me take that stick.

The count was looking at Brett across the table under the gas-light. She
was smoking a cigarette and flicking the ashes on the rug. She saw me
notice it. I say, Jake, I dont want to ruin your rugs. Cant you give
a chap an ash-tray?

I found some ash-trays and spread them around. The chauffeur came up
with a bucket full of salted ice. Put two bottles in it, Henry, the
count called.

Anything else, sir?

No. Wait down in the car. He turned to Brett and to me. Well want to
ride out to the Bois for dinner?

If you like, Brett said. I couldnt eat a thing.

I always like a good meal, said the count.

Should I bring the wine in, sir? asked the chauffeur.

Yes. Bring it in, Henry, said the count. He took out a heavy pigskin
cigar-case and offered it to me. Like to try a real American cigar?

Thanks, I said. Ill finish the cigarette.

He cut off the end of his cigar with a gold cutter he wore on one end of
his watch-chain.

I like a cigar to really draw, said the count Half the cigars you
smoke dont draw.

He lit the cigar, puffed at it, looking across the table at Brett. And
when youre divorced, Lady Ashley, then you wont have a title.

No. What a pity.

No, said the count. You dont need a title. You got class all over
you.

Thanks. Awfully decent of you.

Im not joking you, the count blew a cloud of smoke. You got the most
class of anybody I ever seen. You got it. Thats all.

Nice of you, said Brett. Mummy would be pleased. Couldnt you write
it out, and Ill send it in a letter to her.

Id tell her, too, said the count. Im not joking you. I never joke
people. Joke people and you make enemies. Thats what I always say.

Youre right, Brett said. Youre terribly right. I always joke people
and I havent a friend in the world. Except Jake here.

You dont joke him.

Thats it.

Do you, now? asked the count. Do you joke him?

Brett looked at me and wrinkled up the corners of her eyes.

No, she said. I wouldnt joke him.

See, said the count. You dont joke him.

This is a hell of a dull talk, Brett said. How about some of that
champagne?

The count reached down and twirled the bottles in the shiny bucket. It
isnt cold, yet. Youre always drinking, my dear. Why dont you just
talk?

Ive talked too ruddy much. Ive talked myself all out to Jake.

I should like to hear you really talk, my dear. When you talk to me you
never finish your sentences at all.

Leave em for you to finish. Let any one finish them as they like.

It is a very interesting system, the count reached down and gave the
bottles a twirl. Still I would like to hear you talk some time.

Isnt he a fool? Brett asked.

Now, the count brought up a bottle. I think this is cool.

I brought a towel and he wiped the bottle dry and held it up. I like to
drink champagne from magnums. The wine is better but it would have been
too hard to cool. He held the bottle, looking at it. I put out the
glasses.

I say. You might open it, Brett suggested.

Yes, my dear. Now Ill open it.

It was amazing champagne.

I say that is wine, Brett held up her glass. We ought to toast
something. Heres to royalty.

This wine is too good for toast-drinking, my dear. You dont want to
mix emotions up with a wine like that. You lose the taste.

Bretts glass was empty.

You ought to write a book on wines, count, I said.

Mr. Barnes, answered the count, all I want out of wines is to enjoy
them.

Lets enjoy a little more of this, Brett pushed her glass forward. The
count poured very carefully. There, my dear. Now you enjoy that slowly,
and then you can get drunk.

Drunk? Drunk?

My dear, you are charming when you are drunk.

Listen to the man.

Mr. Barnes, the count poured my glass full. She is the only lady I
have ever known who was as charming when she was drunk as when she was
sober.

You havent been around much, have you?

Yes, my dear. I have been around very much. I have been around a very
great deal.

Drink your wine, said Brett. Weve all been around. I dare say Jake
here has seen as much as you have.

My dear, I am sure Mr. Barnes has seen a lot. Dont think I dont think
so, sir. I have seen a lot, too.

Of course you have, my dear, Brett said. I was only ragging.

I have been in seven wars and four revolutions, the count said.

Soldiering? Brett asked.

Sometimes, my dear. And I have got arrow wounds. Have you ever seen
arrow wounds?

Lets have a look at them.

The count stood up, unbuttoned his vest, and opened his shirt. He pulled
up the undershirt onto his chest and stood, his chest black, and big
stomach muscles bulging under the light.

You see them?

Below the line where his ribs stopped were two raised white welts. See
on the back where they come out. Above the small of the back were the
same two scars, raised as thick as a finger.

I say. Those are something.

Clean through.

The count was tucking in his shirt.

Where did you get those? I asked.

In Abyssinia. When I was twenty-one years old.

What were you doing? asked Brett. Were you in the army?

I was on a business trip, my dear.

I told you he was one of us. Didnt I? Brett turned to me. I love
you, count. Youre a darling.

You make me very happy, my dear. But it isnt true.

Dont be an ass.

You see, Mr. Barnes, it is because I have lived very much that now I
can enjoy everything so well. Dont you find it like that?

Yes. Absolutely.

I know, said the count. That is the secret. You must get to know the
values.

Doesnt anything ever happen to your values? Brett asked.

No. Not any more.

Never fall in love?

Always, said the count. I am always in love.

What does that do to your values?

That, too, has got a place in my values.

You havent any values. Youre dead, thats all.

No, my dear. Youre not right. Im not dead at all.

We drank three bottles of the champagne and the count left the basket in
my kitchen. We dined at a restaurant in the Bois. It was a good dinner.
Food had an excellent place in the counts values. So did wine. The
count was in fine form during the meal. So was Brett. It was a good
party.

Where would you like to go? asked the count after dinner. We were the
only people left in the restaurant. The two waiters were standing over
against the door. They wanted to go home.

We might go up on the hill, Brett said. Havent we had a splendid
party?

The count was beaming. He was very happy.

You are very nice people, he said. He was smoking a cigar again. Why
dont you get married, you two?

We want to lead our own lives, I said.

We have our careers, Brett said. Come on. Lets get out of this.

Have another brandy, the count said.

Get it on the hill.

No. Have it here where it is quiet.

You and your quiet, said Brett. What is it men feel about quiet?

We like it, said the count. Like you like noise, my dear.

All right, said Brett. Lets have one.

Sommelier! the count called.

Yes, sir.

What is the oldest brandy you have?

Eighteen eleven, sir.

Bring us a bottle.

I say. Dont be ostentatious. Call him off, Jake.

Listen, my dear. I get more value for my money in old brandy than in
any other antiquities.

Got many antiquities?

I got a houseful.

Finally we went up to Montmartre. Inside Zellis it was crowded, smoky,
and noisy. The music hit you as you went in. Brett and I danced. It was
so crowded we could barely move. The nigger drummer waved at Brett. We
were caught in the jam, dancing in one place in front of him.

Hahre you?

Great.

Thaats good.

He was all teeth and lips.

Hes a great friend of mine, Brett said. Damn good drummer.

The music stopped and we started toward the table where the count sat.
Then the music started again and we danced. I looked at the count. He
was sitting at the table smoking a cigar. The music stopped again.

Lets go over.

Brett started toward the table. The music started and again we danced,
tight in the crowd.

You are a rotten dancer, Jake. Michaels the best dancer I know.

Hes splendid.

Hes got his points.

I like him, I said. Im damned fond of him.

Im going to marry him, Brett said. Funny. I havent thought about
him for a week.

Dont you write him?

Not I. Never write letters.

Ill bet he writes to you.

Rather. Damned good letters, too.

When are you going to get married?

How do I know? As soon as we can get the divorce. Michaels trying to
get his mother to put up for it.

Could I help you?

Dont be an ass. Michaels people have loads of money.

The music stopped. We walked over to the table. The count stood up.

Very nice, he said. You looked very, very nice.

Dont you dance, count? I asked.

No. Im too old.

Oh, come off it, Brett said.

My dear, I would do it if I would enjoy it. I enjoy to watch you
dance.

Splendid, Brett said. Ill dance again for you some time. I say. What
about your little friend, Zizi?

Let me tell you. I support that boy, but I dont want to have him
around.

He is rather hard.

You know I think that boys got a future. But personally I dont want
him around.

Jakes rather the same way.

He gives me the willys.

Well, the count shrugged his shoulders. About his future you cant
ever tell. Anyhow, his father was a great friend of my father.

Come on. Lets dance, Brett said.

We danced. It was crowded and close.

Oh, darling, Brett said, Im so miserable.

I had that feeling of going through something that has all happened
before. You were happy a minute ago.

The drummer shouted: You cant two time

Its all gone.

Whats the matter?

I dont know. I just feel terribly.

. . . . . . the drummer chanted. Then turned to his sticks.

Want to go?

I had the feeling as in a nightmare of it all being something repeated,
something I had been through and that now I must go through again.

. . . . . . the drummer sang softly.

Lets go, said Brett. You dont mind.

. . . . . . the drummer shouted and grinned at Brett.

All right, I said. We got out from the crowd. Brett went to the
dressing-room.

Brett wants to go, I said to the count. He nodded. Does she? Thats
fine. You take the car. Im going to stay here for a while, Mr. Barnes.

We shook hands.

It was a wonderful time, I said. I wish you would let me get this. I
took a note out of my pocket.

Mr. Barnes, dont be ridiculous, the count said.

Brett came over with her wrap on. She kissed the count and put her hand
on his shoulder to keep him from standing up. As we went out the door I
looked back and there were three girls at his table. We got into the big
car. Brett gave the chauffeur the address of her hotel.

No, dont come up, she said at the hotel. She had rung and the door
was unlatched.

Really?

No. Please.

Good night, Brett, I said. Im sorry you feel rotten.

Good night, Jake. Good night, darling. I wont see you again. We
kissed standing at the door. She pushed me away. We kissed again. Oh,
dont! Brett said.

She turned quickly and went into the hotel. The chauffeur drove me
around to my flat. I gave him twenty francs and he touched his cap and
said: Good night, sir, and drove off. I rang the bell. The door opened
and I went up-stairs and went to bed.




                                BOOK II




                                CHAPTER
                                   8


I did not see Brett again until she came back from San Sebastian. One
card came from her from there. It had a picture of the Concha, and said:
Darling. Very quiet and healthy. Love to all the chaps. BRETT.

Nor did I see Robert Cohn again. I heard Frances had left for England
and I had a note from Cohn saying he was going out in the country for a
couple of weeks, he did not know where, but that he wanted to hold me to
the fishing-trip in Spain we had talked about last winter. I could reach
him always, he wrote, through his bankers.

Brett was gone, I was not bothered by Cohns troubles, I rather enjoyed
not having to play tennis, there was plenty of work to do, I went often
to the races, dined with friends, and put in some extra time at the
office getting things ahead so I could leave it in charge of my
secretary when Bill Gorton and I should shove off to Spain the end of
June. Bill Gorton arrived, put up a couple of days at the flat and went
off to Vienna. He was very cheerful and said the States were wonderful.
New York was wonderful. There had been a grand theatrical season and a
whole crop of great young light heavyweights. Any one of them was a good
prospect to grow up, put on weight and trim Dempsey. Bill was very
happy. He had made a lot of money on his last book, and was going to
make a lot more. We had a good time while he was in Paris, and then he
went off to Vienna. He was coming back in three weeks and we would leave
for Spain to get in some fishing and go to the fiesta at Pamplona. He
wrote that Vienna was wonderful. Then a card from Budapest: Jake,
Budapest is wonderful. Then I got a wire: Back on Monday.

Monday evening he turned up at the flat. I heard his taxi stop and went
to the window and called to him; he waved and started up-stairs carrying
his bags. I met him on the stairs, and took one of the bags.

Well, I said, I hear you had a wonderful trip.

Wonderful, he said. Budapest is absolutely wonderful.

How about Vienna?

Not so good, Jake. Not so good. It seemed better than it was.

How do you mean? I was getting glasses and a siphon.

Tight, Jake. I was tight.

Thats strange. Better have a drink.

Bill rubbed his forehead. Remarkable thing, he said. Dont know how
it happened. Suddenly it happened.

Last long?

Four days, Jake. Lasted just four days.

Where did you go?

Dont remember. Wrote you a post-card. Remember that perfectly.

Do anything else?

Not so sure. Possible.

Go on. Tell me about it.

Cant remember. Tell you anything I could remember.

Go on. Take that drink and remember.

Might remember a little, Bill said. Remember something about a
prize-fight. Enormous Vienna prize-fight. Had a nigger in it. Remember
the nigger perfectly.

Go on.

Wonderful nigger. Looked like Tiger Flowers, only four times as big.
All of a sudden everybody started to throw things. Not me. Niggerd just
knocked local boy down. Nigger put up his glove. Wanted to make a
speech. Awful noble-looking nigger. Started to make a speech. Then local
white boy hit him. Then he knocked white boy cold. Then everybody
commenced to throw chairs. Nigger went home with us in our car. Couldnt
get his clothes. Wore my coat. Remember the whole thing now. Big
sporting evening.

What happened?

Loaned the nigger some clothes and went around with him to try and get
his money. Claimed nigger owed them money on account of wrecking hall.
Wonder who translated? Was it me?

Probably it wasnt you.

Youre right. Wasnt me at all. Was another fellow. Think we called him
the local Harvard man. Remember him now. Studying music.

Howd you come out?

Not so good, Jake. Injustice everywhere. Promoter claimed nigger
promised let local boy stay. Claimed nigger violated contract. Cant
knock out Vienna boy in Vienna. My God, Mister Gorton, said nigger, I
didnt do nothing in there for forty minutes but try and let him stay.
That white boy musta ruptured himself swinging at me. I never did hit
him.

Did you get any money?

No money, Jake. All we could get was niggers clothes. Somebody took
his watch, too. Splendid nigger. Big mistake to have come to Vienna. Not
so good, Jake. Not so good.

What became of the nigger?

Went back to Cologne. Lives there. Married. Got a family. Going to
write me a letter and send me the money I loaned him. Wonderful nigger.
Hope I gave him the right address.

You probably did.

Well, anyway, lets eat, said Bill. Unless you want me to tell you
some more travel stories.

Go on.

Lets eat.

We went down-stairs and out onto the Boulevard St. Michel in the warm
June evening.

Where will we go?

Want to eat on the island?

Sure.

We walked down the Boulevard. At the juncture of the Rue
Denfert-Rochereau with the Boulevard is a statue of two men in flowing
robes.

I know who they are. Bill eyed the monument. Gentlemen who invented
pharmacy. Dont try and fool me on Paris.

We went on.

Heres a taxidermists, Bill said. Want to buy anything? Nice stuffed
dog?

Come on, I said. Youre pie-eyed.

Pretty nice stuffed dogs, Bill said. Certainly brighten up your
flat.

Come on.

Just one stuffed dog. I can take em or leave em alone. But listen,
Jake. Just one stuffed dog.

Come on.

Mean everything in the world to you after you bought it. Simple
exchange of values. You give them money. They give you a stuffed dog.

Well get one on the way back.

All right. Have it your own way. Road to hell paved with unbought
stuffed dogs. Not my fault.

We went on.

Howd you feel that way about dogs so sudden?

Always felt that way about dogs. Always been a great lover of stuffed
animals.

We stopped and had a drink.

Certainly like to drink, Bill said. You ought to try it some times,
Jake.

Youre about a hundred and forty-four ahead of me.

Ought not to daunt you. Never be daunted. Secret of my success. Never
been daunted. Never been daunted in public.

Where were you drinking?

Stopped at the Crillon. George made me a couple of Jack Roses. Georges
a great man. Know the secret of his success? Never been daunted.

Youll be daunted after about three more pernods.

Not in public. If I begin to feel daunted Ill go off by myself. Im
like a cat that way.

When did you see Harvey Stone?

At the Crillon. Harvey was just a little daunted. Hadnt eaten for
three days. Doesnt eat any more. Just goes off like a cat. Pretty sad.

Hes all right.

Splendid. Wish he wouldnt keep going off like a cat, though. Makes me
nervous.

Whatll we do to-night?

Doesnt make any difference. Only lets not get daunted. Suppose they
got any hard-boiled eggs here? If they had hard-boiled eggs here we
wouldnt have to go all the way down to the island to eat.

Nix, I said. Were going to have a regular meal.

Just a suggestion, said Bill. Want to start now?

Come on.

We started on again down the Boulevard. A horse-cab passed us. Bill
looked at it.

See that horse-cab? Going to have that horse-cab stuffed for you for
Christmas. Going to give all my friends stuffed animals. Im a
nature-writer.

A taxi passed, some one in it waved, then banged for the driver to stop.
The taxi backed up to the curb. In it was Brett.

Beautiful lady, said Bill. Going to kidnap us.

Hullo! Brett said. Hullo!

This is Bill Gorton. Lady Ashley.

Brett smiled at Bill. I say Im just back. Havent bathed even. Michael
comes in to-night.

Good. Come on and eat with us, and well all go to meet him.

Must clean myself.

Oh, rot! Come on.

Must bathe. He doesnt get in till nine.

Come and have a drink, then, before you bathe.

Might do that. Now youre not talking rot.

We got in the taxi. The driver looked around.

Stop at the nearest bistro, I said.

We might as well go to the Closerie, Brett said. I cant drink these
rotten brandies.

Closerie des Lilas.

Brett turned to Bill.

Have you been in this pestilential city long?

Just got in to-day from Budapest.

How was Budapest?

Wonderful. Budapest was wonderful.

Ask him about Vienna.

Vienna, said Bill, is a strange city.

Very much like Paris, Brett smiled at him, wrinkling the corners of
her eyes.

Exactly, Bill said. Very much like Paris at this moment.

You _have_ a good start.

Sitting out on the terraces of the Lilas Brett ordered a whiskey and
soda, I took one, too, and Bill took another pernod.

How are you, Jake?

Great, I said. Ive had a good time.

Brett looked at me. I was a fool to go away, she said. Ones an ass
to leave Paris.

Did you have a good time?

Oh, all right. Interesting. Not frightfully amusing.

See anybody?

No, hardly anybody. I never went out.

Didnt you swim?

No. Didnt do a thing.

Sounds like Vienna, Bill said.

Brett wrinkled up the corners of her eyes at him.

So thats the way it was in Vienna.

It was like everything in Vienna.

Brett smiled at him again.

Youve a nice friend, Jake.

Hes all right, I said. Hes a taxidermist.

That was in another country, Bill said. And besides all the animals
were dead.

One more, Brett said, and I must run. Do send the waiter for a taxi.

Theres a line of them. Right out in front.

Good.

We had the drink and put Brett into her taxi.

Mind youre at the Select around ten. Make him come. Michael will be
there.

Well be there, Bill said. The taxi started and Brett waved.

Quite a girl, Bill said. Shes damned nice. Whos Michael?

The man shes going to marry.

Well, well, Bill said. Thats always just the stage I meet anybody.
Whatll I send them? Think theyd like a couple of stuffed race-horses?

We better eat.

Is she really Lady something or other? Bill asked in the taxi on our
way down to the Ile Saint Louis.

Oh, yes. In the stud-book and everything.

Well, well.

We ate dinner at Madame Lecomtes restaurant on the far side of the
island. It was crowded with Americans and we had to stand up and wait
for a place. Some one had put it in the American Womens Club list as a
quaint restaurant on the Paris quais as yet untouched by Americans, so
we had to wait forty-five minutes for a table. Bill had eaten at the
restaurant in 1918, and right after the armistice, and Madame Lecomte
made a great fuss over seeing him.

Doesnt get us a table, though, Bill said. Grand woman, though.

We had a good meal, a roast chicken, new green beans, mashed potatoes, a
salad, and some apple-pie and cheese.

Youve got the world here all right, Bill said to Madame Lecomte. She
raised her hand. Oh, my God!

Youll be rich.

I hope so.

After the coffee and a _fine_ we got the bill, chalked up the same as
ever on a slate, that was doubtless one of the quaint features, paid
it, shook hands, and went out.

You never come here any more, Monsieur Barnes, Madame Lecomte said.

Too many compatriots.

Come at lunch-time. Its not crowded then.

Good. Ill be down soon.

We walked along under the trees that grew out over the river on the Quai
dOrlans side of the island. Across the river were the broken walls of
old houses that were being torn down.

Theyre going to cut a street through.

They would, Bill said.

We walked on and circled the island. The river was dark and a bateau
mouche went by, all bright with lights, going fast and quiet up and out
of sight under the bridge. Down the river was Notre Dame squatting
against the night sky. We crossed to the left bank of the Seine by the
wooden foot-bridge from the Quai de Bethune, and stopped on the bridge
and looked down the river at Notre Dame. Standing on the bridge the
island looked dark, the houses were high against the sky, and the trees
were shadows.

Its pretty grand, Bill said. God, I love to get back.

We leaned on the wooden rail of the bridge and looked up the river to
the lights of the big bridges. Below the water was smooth and black. It
made no sound against the piles of the bridge. A man and a girl passed
us. They were walking with their arms around each other.

We crossed the bridge and walked up the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It was
steep walking, and we went all the way up to the Place Contrescarpe. The
arc-light shone through the leaves of the trees in the square, and
underneath the trees was an S bus ready to start. Music came out of the
door of the Negre Joyeux. Through the window of the Caf Aux Amateurs I
saw the long zinc bar. Outside on the terrace working people were
drinking. In the open kitchen of the Amateurs a girl was cooking
potato-chips in oil. There was an iron pot of stew. The girl ladled some
onto a plate for an old man who stood holding a bottle of red wine in
one hand.

Want to have a drink?

No, said Bill. I dont need it.

We turned to the right off the Place Contrescarpe, walking along smooth
narrow streets with high old houses on both sides. Some of the houses
jutted out toward the street. Others were cut back. We came onto the Rue
du Pot de Fer and followed it along until it brought us to the rigid
north and south of the Rue Saint Jacques and then walked south, past Val
de Grce, set back behind the courtyard and the iron fence, to the
Boulevard du Port Royal.

What do you want to do? I asked. Go up to the caf and see Brett and
Mike?

Why not?

We walked along Port Royal until it became Montparnasse, and then on
past the Lilas, Lavignes, and all the little cafs, Damoys, crossed
the street to the Rotonde, past its lights and tables to the Select.

Michael came toward us from the tables. He was tanned and
healthy-looking.

Hel-lo, Jake, he said. Hel-lo! Hel-lo! How are you, old lad?

You look very fit, Mike.

Oh, I am. Im frightfully fit. Ive done nothing but walk. Walk all day
long. One drink a day with my mother at tea.

Bill had gone into the bar. He was standing talking with Brett, who was
sitting on a high stool, her legs crossed. She had no stockings on.

Its good to see you, Jake, Michael said. Im a little tight you
know. Amazing, isnt it? Did you see my nose?

There was a patch of dried blood on the bridge of his nose.

An old ladys bags did that, Mike said. I reached up to help her with
them and they fell on me.

Brett gestured at him from the bar with her cigarette-holder and
wrinkled the corners of her eyes.

An old lady, said Mike. Her bags _fell_ on me. Lets go in and see
Brett. I say, she is a piece. You _are_ a lovely lady, Brett. Where did
you get that hat?

Chap bought it for me. Dont you like it?

Its a dreadful hat. Do get a good hat.

Oh, weve so much money now, Brett said. I say, havent you met Bill
yet? You _are_ a lovely host, Jake.

She turned to Mike. This is Bill Gorton. This drunkard is Mike
Campbell. Mr. Campbell is an undischarged bankrupt.

Arent I, though? You know I met my ex-partner yesterday in London.
Chap who did me in.

What did he say?

Bought me a drink. I thought I might as well take it. I say, Brett, you
_are_ a lovely piece. Dont you think shes beautiful?

Beautiful. With this nose?

Its a lovely nose. Go on, point it at me. Isnt she a lovely piece?

Couldnt we have kept the man in Scotland?

I say, Brett, lets turn in early.

Dont be indecent, Michael. Remember there are ladies at this bar.

Isnt she a lovely piece? Dont you think so, Jake?

Theres a fight to-night, Bill said. Like to go?

Fight, said Mike. Whos fighting?

Ledoux and somebody.

Hes very good, Ledoux, Mike said. Id like to see it, ratherhe
was making an effort to pull himself togetherbut I cant go. I had a
date with this thing here. I say, Brett, do get a new hat.

Brett pulled the felt hat down far over one eye and smiled out from
under it. You two run along to the fight. Ill have to be taking Mr.
Campbell home directly.

Im not tight, Mike said. Perhaps just a little. I say, Brett, you
are a lovely piece.

Go on to the fight, Brett said. Mr. Campbells getting difficult.
What are these outbursts of affection, Michael?

I say, you are a lovely piece.

We said good night. Im sorry I cant go, Mike said. Brett laughed. I
looked back from the door. Mike had one hand on the bar and was leaning
toward Brett, talking. Brett was looking at him quite coolly, but the
corners of her eyes were smiling.

Outside on the pavement I said: Do you want to go to the fight?

Sure, said Bill. If we dont have to walk.

Mike was pretty excited about his girl friend, I said in the taxi.

Well, said Bill. You cant blame him such a hell of a lot.




                                CHAPTER
                                   9


The Ledoux-Kid Francis fight was the night of the 20th of June. It was a
good fight. The morning after the fight I had a letter from Robert Cohn,
written from Hendaye. He was having a very quiet time, he said, bathing,
playing some golf and much bridge. Hendaye had a splendid beach, but he
was anxious to start on the fishing-trip. When would I be down? If I
would buy him a double-tapered line he would pay me when I came down.

That same morning I wrote Cohn from the office that Bill and I would
leave Paris on the 25th unless I wired him otherwise, and would meet him
at Bayonne, where we could get a bus over the mountains to Pamplona. The
same evening about seven oclock I stopped in at the Select to see
Michael and Brett. They were not there, and I went over to the Dingo.
They were inside sitting at the bar.

Hello, darling. Brett put out her hand.

Hello, Jake, Mike said. I understand I was tight last night.

Werent you, though, Brett said. Disgraceful business.

Look, said Mike, when do you go down to Spain? Would you mind if we
came down with you?

It would be grand.

You wouldnt mind, really? Ive been at Pamplona, you know. Bretts mad
to go. Youre sure we wouldnt just be a bloody nuisance?

Dont talk like a fool.

Im a little tight, you know. I wouldnt ask you like this if I
werent. Youre sure you dont mind?

Oh, shut up, Michael, Brett said. How can the man say hed mind now?
Ill ask him later.

But you dont mind, do you?

Dont ask that again unless you want to make me sore. Bill and I go
down on the morning of the 25th.

By the way, where is Bill? Brett asked.

Hes out at Chantilly dining with some people.

Hes a good chap.

Splendid chap, said Mike. He is, you know.

You dont remember him, Brett said.

I do. Remember him perfectly. Look, Jake, well come down the night of
the 25th. Brett cant get up in the morning.

Indeed not!

If our money comes and youre sure you dont mind.

It will come, all right. Ill see to that.

Tell me what tackle to send for.

Get two or three rods with reels, and lines, and some flies.

I wont fish, Brett put in.

Get two rods, then, and Bill wont have to buy one.

Right, said Mike. Ill send a wire to the keeper.

Wont it be splendid, Brett said. Spain! We _will_ have fun.

The 25th. When is that?

Saturday.

We _will_ have to get ready.

I say, said Mike, Im going to the barbers.

I must bathe, said Brett. Walk up to the hotel with me, Jake. Be a
good chap.

We _have_ got the loveliest hotel, Mike said. I think its a
brothel!

We left our bags here at the Dingo when we got in, and they asked us at
this hotel if we wanted a room for the afternoon only. Seemed
frightfully pleased we were going to stay all night.

_I_ believe its a brothel, Mike said. And _I_ should know.

Oh, shut it and go and get your hair cut.

Mike went out. Brett and I sat on at the bar.

Have another?

Might.

I needed that, Brett said.

We walked up the Rue Delambre.

I havent seen you since Ive been back, Brett said.

No.

How _are_ you, Jake?

Fine.

Brett looked at me. I say, she said, is Robert Cohn going on this
trip?

Yes. Why?

Dont you think it will be a bit rough on him?

Why should it?

Who did you think I went down to San Sebastian with?

Congratulations, I said.

We walked along.

What did you say that for?

I dont know. What would you like me to say?

We walked along and turned a corner.

He behaved rather well, too. He gets a little dull.

Does he?

I rather thought it would be good for him.

You might take up social service.

Dont be nasty.

I wont.

Didnt you really know?

No, I said. I guess I didnt think about it.

Do you think it will be too rough on him?

Thats up to him, I said. Tell him youre coming. He can always not
come.

Ill write him and give him a chance to pull out of it.

I did not see Brett again until the night of the 24th of June.

Did you hear from Cohn?

Rather. Hes keen about it.

My God!

I thought it was rather odd myself.

Says he cant wait to see me.

Does he think youre coming alone?

No. I told him we were all coming down together. Michael and all.

Hes wonderful.

Isnt he?

They expected their money the next day. We arranged to meet at Pamplona.
They would go directly to San Sebastian and take the train from there.
We would all meet at the Montoya in Pamplona. If they did not turn up on
Monday at the latest we would go on ahead up to Burguete in the
mountains, to start fishing. There was a bus to Burguete. I wrote out an
itinerary so they could follow us.

Bill and I took the morning train from the Gare dOrsay. It was a lovely
day, not too hot, and the country was beautiful from the start. We went
back into the diner and had breakfast. Leaving the dining-car I asked
the conductor for tickets for the first service.

Nothing until the fifth.

Whats this?

There were never more than two servings of lunch on that train, and
always plenty of places for both of them.

Theyre all reserved, the dining-car conductor said. There will be a
fifth service at three-thirty.

This is serious, I said to Bill.

Give him ten francs.

Here, I said. We want to eat in the first service.

The conductor put the ten francs in his pocket.

Thank you, he said. I would advise you gentlemen to get some
sandwiches. All the places for the first four services were reserved at
the office of the company.

Youll go a long way, brother, Bill said to him in English. I suppose
if Id given you five francs you would have advised us to jump off the
train.

_Comment?_

Go to hell! said Bill. Get the sandwiches made and a bottle of wine.
You tell him, Jake.

And send it up to the next car. I described where we were.

In our compartment were a man and his wife and their young son.

I suppose youre Americans, arent you? the man asked. Having a good
trip?

Wonderful, said Bill.

Thats what you want to do. Travel while youre young. Mother and I
always wanted to get over, but we had to wait a while.

You could have come over ten years ago, if youd wanted to, the wife
said. What you always said was: See America first! I will say weve
seen a good deal, take it one way and another.

Say, theres plenty of Americans on this train, the husband said.
Theyve got seven cars of them from Dayton, Ohio. Theyve been on a
pilgrimage to Rome, and now theyre going down to Biarritz and Lourdes.

So, thats what they are. Pilgrims. Goddam Puritans, Bill said.

What part of the States you boys from?

Kansas City, I said. Hes from Chicago.

You both going to Biarritz?

No. Were going fishing in Spain.

Well, I never cared for it, myself. Theres plenty that do out where I
come from, though. We got some of the best fishing in the State of
Montana. Ive been out with the boys, but I never cared for it any.

Mighty little fishing you did on them trips, his wife said.

He winked at us.

You know how the ladies are. If theres a jug goes along, or a case of
beer, they think its hell and damnation.

Thats the way men are, his wife said to us. She smoothed her
comfortable lap. I voted against prohibition to please him, and because
I like a little beer in the house, and then he talks that way. Its a
wonder they ever find any one to marry them.

Say, said Bill, do you know that gang of Pilgrim Fathers have
cornered the dining-car until half past three this afternoon?

How do you mean? They cant do a thing like that.

You try and get seats.

Well, mother, it looks as though we better go back and get another
breakfast.

She stood up and straightened her dress.

Will you boys keep an eye on our things? Come on, Hubert.

They all three went up to the wagon restaurant. A little while after
they were gone a steward went through announcing the first service, and
pilgrims, with their priests, commenced filing down the corridor. Our
friend and his family did not come back. A waiter passed in the corridor
with our sandwiches and the bottle of Chablis, and we called him in.

Youre going to work to-day, I said.

He nodded his head. They start now, at ten-thirty.

When do we eat?

Huh! When do I eat?

He left two glasses for the bottle, and we paid him for the sandwiches
and tipped him.

Ill get the plates, he said, or bring them with you.

We ate the sandwiches and drank the Chablis and watched the country out
of the window. The grain was just beginning to ripen and the fields were
full of poppies. The pastureland was green, and there were fine trees,
and sometimes big rivers and chateaux off in the trees.

At Tours we got off and bought another bottle of wine, and when we got
back in the compartment the gentleman from Montana and his wife and his
son, Hubert, were sitting comfortably.

Is there good swimming in Biarritz? asked Hubert.

That boys just crazy till he can get in the water, his mother said.
Its pretty hard on youngsters travelling.

Theres good swimming, I said. But its dangerous when its rough.

Did you get a meal? Bill asked.

We sure did. We set right there when they started to come in, and they
must have just thought we were in the party. One of the waiters said
something to us in French, and then they just sent three of them back.

They thought we were snappers, all right, the man said. It certainly
shows you the power of the Catholic Church. Its a pity you boys aint
Catholics. You could get a meal, then, all right.

I am, I said. Thats what makes me so sore.

Finally at a quarter past four we had lunch. Bill had been rather
difficult at the last. He buttonholed a priest who was coming back with
one of the returning streams of pilgrims.

When do us Protestants get a chance to eat, father?

I dont know anything about it. Havent you got tickets?

Its enough to make a man join the Klan, Bill said. The priest looked
back at him.

Inside the dining-car the waiters served the fifth successive table
dhte meal. The waiter who served us was soaked through. His white
jacket was purple under the arms.

He must drink a lot of wine.

Or wear purple undershirts.

Lets ask him.

No. Hes too tired.

The train stopped for half an hour at Bordeaux and we went out through
the station for a little walk. There was not time to get in to the town.
Afterward we passed through the Landes and watched the sun set. There
were wide fire-gaps cut through the pines, and you could look up them
like avenues and see wooded hills way off. About seven-thirty we had
dinner and watched the country through the open window in the diner. It
was all sandy pine country full of heather. There were little clearings
with houses in them, and once in a while we passed a sawmill. It got
dark and we could feel the country hot and sandy and dark outside of the
window, and about nine oclock we got into Bayonne. The man and his wife
and Hubert all shook hands with us. They were going on to LaNegresse to
change for Biarritz.

Well, I hope you have lots of luck, he said.

Be careful about those bull-fights.

Maybe well see you at Biarritz, Hubert said.

We got off with our bags and rod-cases and passed through the dark
station and out to the lights and the line of cabs and hotel buses.
There, standing with the hotel runners, was Robert Cohn. He did not see
us at first. Then he started forward.

Hello, Jake. Have a good trip?

Fine, I said. This is Bill Gorton.

How are you?

Come on, said Robert. Ive got a cab. He was a little near-sighted.
I had never noticed it before. He was looking at Bill, trying to make
him out. He was shy, too.

Well go up to my hotel. Its all right. Its quite nice.

We got into the cab, and the cabman put the bags up on the seat beside
him and climbed up and cracked his whip, and we drove over the dark
bridge and into the town.

Im awfully glad to meet you, Robert said to Bill. Ive heard so much
about you from Jake and Ive read your books. Did you get my line,
Jake?

The cab stopped in front of the hotel and we all got out and went in. It
was a nice hotel, and the people at the desk were very cheerful, and we
each had a good small room.




                                CHAPTER
                                   10


In the morning it was bright, and they were sprinkling the streets of
the town, and we all had breakfast in a caf. Bayonne is a nice town. It
is like a very clean Spanish town and it is on a big river. Already, so
early in the morning, it was very hot on the bridge across the river. We
walked out on the bridge and then took a walk through the town.

I was not at all sure Mikes rods would come from Scotland in time, so
we hunted a tackle store and finally bought a rod for Bill up-stairs
over a drygoods store. The man who sold the tackle was out, and we had
to wait for him to come back. Finally he came in, and we bought a pretty
good rod cheap, and two landing-nets.

We went out into the street again and took a look at the cathedral. Cohn
made some remark about it being a very good example of something or
other, I forget what. It seemed like a nice cathedral, nice and dim,
like Spanish churches. Then we went up past the old fort and out to the
local Syndicat dInitiative office, where the bus was supposed to start
from. There they told us the bus service did not start until the 1st of
July. We found out at the tourist office what we ought to pay for a
motor-car to Pamplona and hired one at a big garage just around the
corner from the Municipal Theatre for four hundred francs. The car was
to pick us up at the hotel in forty minutes, and we stopped at the caf
on the square where we had eaten breakfast, and had a beer. It was hot,
but the town had a cool, fresh, early-morning smell and it was pleasant
sitting in the caf. A breeze started to blow, and you could feel that
the air came from the sea. There were pigeons out in the square, and the
houses were a yellow, sun-baked color, and I did not want to leave the
caf. But we had to go to the hotel to get our bags packed and pay the
bill. We paid for the beers, we matched and I think Cohn paid, and went
up to the hotel. It was only sixteen francs apiece for Bill and me, with
ten per cent added for the service, and we had the bags sent down and
waited for Robert Cohn. While we were waiting I saw a cockroach on the
parquet floor that must have been at least three inches long. I pointed
him out to Bill and then put my shoe on him. We agreed he must have just
come in from the garden. It was really an awfully clean hotel.

Cohn came down, finally, and we all went out to the car. It was a big,
closed car, with a driver in a white duster with blue collar and cuffs,
and we had him put the back of the car down. He piled in the bags and we
started off up the street and out of the town. We passed some lovely
gardens and had a good look back at the town, and then we were out in
the country, green and rolling, and the road climbing all the time. We
passed lots of Basques with oxen, or cattle, hauling carts along the
road, and nice farmhouses, low roofs, and all white-plastered. In the
Basque country the land all looks very rich and green and the houses and
villages look well-off and clean. Every village had a pelota court and
on some of them kids were playing in the hot sun. There were signs on
the walls of the churches saying it was forbidden to play pelota against
them, and the houses in the villages had red tiled roofs, and then the
road turned off and commenced to climb and we were going way up close
along a hillside, with a valley below and hills stretched off back
toward the sea. You couldnt see the sea. It was too far away. You could
see only hills and more hills, and you knew where the sea was.

We crossed the Spanish frontier. There was a little stream and a bridge,
and Spanish carabineers, with patent-leather Bonaparte hats, and short
guns on their backs, on one side, and on the other fat Frenchmen in
kepis and mustaches. They only opened one bag and took the passports in
and looked at them. There was a general store and inn on each side of
the line. The chauffeur had to go in and fill out some papers about the
car and we got out and went over to the stream to see if there were any
trout. Bill tried to talk some Spanish to one of the carabineers, but it
did not go very well. Robert Cohn asked, pointing with his finger, if
there were any trout in the stream, and the carabineer said yes, but not
many.

I asked him if he ever fished, and he said no, that he didnt care for
it.

Just then an old man with long, sunburned hair and beard, and clothes
that looked as though they were made of gunny-sacking, came striding up
to the bridge. He was carrying a long staff, and he had a kid slung on
his back, tied by the four legs, the head hanging down.

The carabineer waved him back with his sword. The man turned without
saying anything, and started back up the white road into Spain.

Whats the matter with the old one? I asked.

He hasnt got any passport.

I offered the guard a cigarette. He took it and thanked me.

What will he do? I asked.

The guard spat in the dust.

Oh, hell just wade across the stream.

Do you have much smuggling?

Oh, he said, they go through.

The chauffeur came out, folding up the papers and putting them in the
inside pocket of his coat. We all got in the car and it started up the
white dusty road into Spain. For a while the country was much as it had
been; then, climbing all the time, we crossed the top of a Col, the road
winding back and forth on itself, and then it was really Spain. There
were long brown mountains and a few pines and far-off forests of
beech-trees on some of the mountainsides. The road went along the summit
of the Col and then dropped down, and the driver had to honk, and slow
up, and turn out to avoid running into two donkeys that were sleeping in
the road. We came down out of the mountains and through an oak forest,
and there were white cattle grazing in the forest. Down below there were
grassy plains and clear streams, and then we crossed a stream and went
through a gloomy little village, and started to climb again. We climbed
up and up and crossed another high Col and turned along it, and the road
ran down to the right, and we saw a whole new range of mountains off to
the south, all brown and baked-looking and furrowed in strange shapes.

After a while we came out of the mountains, and there were trees along
both sides of the road, and a stream and ripe fields of grain, and the
road went on, very white and straight ahead, and then lifted to a little
rise, and off on the left was a hill with an old castle, with buildings
close around it and a field of grain going right up to the walls and
shifting in the wind. I was up in front with the driver and I turned
around. Robert Cohn was asleep, but Bill looked and nodded his head.
Then we crossed a wide plain, and there was a big river off on the right
shining in the sun from between the line of trees, and away off you
could see the plateau of Pamplona rising out of the plain, and the walls
of the city, and the great brown cathedral, and the broken skyline of
the other churches. In back of the plateau were the mountains, and every
way you looked there were other mountains, and ahead the road stretched
out white across the plain going toward Pamplona.

We came into the town on the other side of the plateau, the road
slanting up steeply and dustily with shade-trees on both sides, and then
levelling out through the new part of town they are building up outside
the old walls. We passed the bull-ring, high and white and
concrete-looking in the sun, and then came into the big square by a side
street and stopped in front of the Hotel Montoya.

The driver helped us down with the bags. There was a crowd of kids
watching the car, and the square was hot, and the trees were green, and
the flags hung on their staffs, and it was good to get out of the sun
and under the shade of the arcade that runs all the way around the
square. Montoya was glad to see us, and shook hands and gave us good
rooms looking out on the square, and then we washed and cleaned up and
went down-stairs in the dining-room for lunch. The driver stayed for
lunch, too, and afterward we paid him and he started back to Bayonne.

There are two dining-rooms in the Montoya. One is up-stairs on the
second floor and looks out on the square. The other is down one floor
below the level of the square and has a door that opens on the back
street that the bulls pass along when they run through the streets early
in the morning on their way to the ring. It is always cool in the
down-stairs dining-room and we had a very good lunch. The first meal in
Spain was always a shock with the hors duvres, an egg course, two meat
courses, vegetables, salad, and dessert and fruit. You have to drink
plenty of wine to get it all down. Robert Cohn tried to say he did not
want any of the second meat course, but we would not interpret for him,
and so the waitress brought him something else as a replacement, a plate
of cold meats, I think. Cohn had been rather nervous ever since we had
met at Bayonne. He did not know whether we knew Brett had been with him
at San Sebastian, and it made him rather awkward.

Well, I said, Brett and Mike ought to get in to-night.

Im not sure theyll come, Cohn said.

Why not? Bill said. Of course theyll come.

Theyre always late, I said.

I rather think theyre not coming, Robert Cohn said.

He said it with an air of superior knowledge that irritated both of us.

Ill bet you fifty pesetas theyre here to-night, Bill said. He always
bets when he is angered, and so he usually bets foolishly.

Ill take it, Cohn said. Good. You remember it, Jake. Fifty pesetas.

Ill remember it myself, Bill said. I saw he was angry and wanted to
smooth him down.

Its a sure thing theyll come, I said. But maybe not to-night.

Want to call it off? Cohn asked.

No. Why should I? Make it a hundred if you like.

All right. Ill take that.

Thats enough, I said. Or youll have to make a book and give me some
of it.

Im satisfied, Cohn said. He smiled. Youll probably win it back at
bridge, anyway.

You havent got it yet, Bill said.

We went out to walk around under the arcade to the Caf Irua for
coffee. Cohn said he was going over and get a shave.

Say, Bill said to me, have I got any chance on that bet?

Youve got a rotten chance. Theyve never been on time anywhere. If
their money doesnt come its a cinch they wont get in to-night.

I was sorry as soon as I opened my mouth. But I had to call him. Hes
all right, I guess, but where does he get this inside stuff? Mike and
Brett fixed it up with us about coming down here.

I saw Cohn coming over across the square.

Here he comes.

Well, let him not get superior and Jewish.

The barber shops closed, Cohn said. Its not open till four.

We had coffee at the Irua, sitting in comfortable wicker chairs looking
out from the cool of the arcade at the big square. After a while Bill
went to write some letters and Cohn went over to the barber-shop. It was
still closed, so he decided to go up to the hotel and get a bath, and I
sat out in front of the caf and then went for a walk in the town. It
was very hot, but I kept on the shady side of the streets and went
through the market and had a good time seeing the town again. I went to
the Ayuntamiento and found the old gentleman who subscribes for the
bull-fight tickets for me every year, and he had gotten the money I sent
him from Paris and renewed my subscriptions, so that was all set. He was
the archivist, and all the archives of the town were in his office. That
has nothing to do with the story. Anyway, his office had a green baize
door and a big wooden door, and when I went out I left him sitting among
the archives that covered all the walls, and I shut both the doors, and
as I went out of the building into the street the porter stopped me to
brush off my coat.

You must have been in a motor-car, he said.

The back of the collar and the upper part of the shoulders were gray
with dust.

From Bayonne.

Well, well, he said. I knew you were in a motor-car from the way the
dust was. So I gave him two copper coins.

At the end of the street I saw the cathedral and walked up toward it.
The first time I ever saw it I thought the faade was ugly but I liked
it now. I went inside. It was dim and dark and the pillars went high up,
and there were people praying, and it smelt of incense, and there were
some wonderful big windows. I knelt and started to pray and prayed for
everybody I thought of, Brett and Mike and Bill and Robert Cohn and
myself, and all the bull-fighters, separately for the ones I liked, and
lumping all the rest, then I prayed for myself again, and while I was
praying for myself I found I was getting sleepy, so I prayed that the
bull-fights would be good, and that it would be a fine fiesta, and that
we would get some fishing. I wondered if there was anything else I might
pray for, and I thought I would like to have some money, so I prayed
that I would make a lot of money, and then I started to think how I
would make it, and thinking of making money reminded me of the count,
and I started wondering about where he was, and regretting I hadnt seen
him since that night in Montmartre, and about something funny Brett told
me about him, and as all the time I was kneeling with my forehead on the
wood in front of me, and was thinking of myself as praying, I was a
little ashamed, and regretted that I was such a rotten Catholic, but
realized there was nothing I could do about it, at least for a while,
and maybe never, but that anyway it was a grand religion, and I only
wished I felt religious and maybe I would the next time; and then I was
out in the hot sun on the steps of the cathedral, and the forefingers
and the thumb of my right hand were still damp, and I felt them dry in
the sun. The sunlight was hot and hard, and I crossed over beside some
buildings, and walked back along side-streets to the hotel.

At dinner that night we found that Robert Cohn had taken a bath, had had
a shave and a haircut and a shampoo, and something put on his hair
afterward to make it stay down. He was nervous, and I did not try to
help him any. The train was due in at nine oclock from San Sebastian,
and, if Brett and Mike were coming, they would be on it. At twenty
minutes to nine we were not half through dinner. Robert Cohn got up from
the table and said he would go to the station. I said I would go with
him, just to devil him. Bill said he would be damned if he would leave
his dinner. I said we would be right back.

We walked to the station. I was enjoying Cohns nervousness. I hoped
Brett would be on the train. At the station the train was late, and we
sat on a baggage-truck and waited outside in the dark. I have never seen
a man in civil life as nervous as Robert Cohnnor as eager. I was
enjoying it. It was lousy to enjoy it, but I felt lousy. Cohn had a
wonderful quality of bringing out the worst in anybody.

After a while we heard the train-whistle way off below on the other side
of the plateau, and then we saw the headlight coming up the hill. We
went inside the station and stood with a crowd of people just back of
the gates, and the train came in and stopped, and everybody started
coming out through the gates.

They were not in the crowd. We waited till everybody had gone through
and out of the station and gotten into buses, or taken cabs, or were
walking with their friends or relatives through the dark into the town.

I knew they wouldnt come, Robert said. We were going back to the
hotel.

I thought they might, I said.

Bill was eating fruit when we came in and finishing a bottle of wine.

Didnt come, eh?

No.

Do you mind if I give you that hundred pesetas in the morning, Cohn?
Bill asked. I havent changed any money here yet.

Oh, forget about it, Robert Cohn said. Lets bet on something else.
Can you bet on bull-fights?

You could, Bill said, but you dont need to.

It would be like betting on the war, I said. You dont need any
economic interest.

Im very curious to see them, Robert said.

Montoya came up to our table. He had a telegram in his hand. Its for
you. He handed it to me.

It read: Stopped night San Sebastian.

Its from them, I said. I put it in my pocket. Ordinarily I should
have handed it over.

Theyve stopped over in San Sebastian, I said. Send their regards to
you.

Why I felt that impulse to devil him I do not know. Of course I do know.
I was blind, unforgivingly jealous of what had happened to him. The fact
that I took it as a matter of course did not alter that any. I certainly
did hate him. I do not think I ever really hated him until he had that
little spell of superiority at lunchthat and when he went through all
that barbering. So I put the telegram in my pocket. The telegram came to
me, anyway.

Well, I said. We ought to pull out on the noon bus for Burguete. They
can follow us if they get in to-morrow night.

There were only two trains up from San Sebastian, an early morning train
and the one we had just met.

That sounds like a good idea, Cohn said.

The sooner we get on the stream the better.

Its all one to me when we start, Bill said. The sooner the better.

We sat in the Irua for a while and had coffee and then took a little
walk out to the bull-ring and across the field and under the trees at
the edge of the cliff and looked down at the river in the dark, and I
turned in early. Bill and Cohn stayed out in the caf quite late, I
believe, because I was asleep when they came in.

In the morning I bought three tickets for the bus to Burguete. It was
scheduled to leave at two oclock. There was nothing earlier. I was
sitting over at the Irua reading the papers when I saw Robert Cohn
coming across the square. He came up to the table and sat down in one of
the wicker chairs.

This is a comfortable caf, he said. Did you have a good night,
Jake?

I slept like a log.

I didnt sleep very well. Bill and I were out late, too.

Where were you?

Here. And after it shut we went over to that other caf. The old man
there speaks German and English.

The Caf Suizo.

Thats it. He seems like a nice old fellow. I think its a better caf
than this one.

Its not so good in the daytime, I said. Too hot. By the way, I got
the bus tickets.

Im not going up to-day. You and Bill go on ahead.

Ive got your ticket.

Give it to me. Ill get the money back.

Its five pesetas.

Robert Cohn took out a silver five-peseta piece and gave it to me.

I ought to stay, he said. You see Im afraid theres some sort of
misunderstanding.

Why, I said. They may not come here for three or four days now if
they start on parties at San Sebastian.

Thats just it, said Robert. Im afraid they expected to meet me at
San Sebastian, and thats why they stopped over.

What makes you think that?

Well, I wrote suggesting it to Brett.

Why in hell didnt you stay there and meet them then? I started to
say, but I stopped. I thought that idea would come to him by itself, but
I do not believe it ever did.

He was being confidential now and it was giving him pleasure to be able
to talk with the understanding that I knew there was something between
him and Brett.

Well, Bill and I will go up right after lunch, I said.

I wish I could go. Weve been looking forward to this fishing all
winter. He was being sentimental about it. But I ought to stay. I
really ought. As soon as they come Ill bring them right up.

Lets find Bill.

I want to go over to the barber-shop.

See you at lunch.

I found Bill up in his room. He was shaving.

Oh, yes, he told me all about it last night, Bill said. Hes a great
little confider. He said he had a date with Brett at San Sebastian.

The lying bastard!

Oh, no, said Bill. Dont get sore. Dont get sore at this stage of
the trip. How did you ever happen to know this fellow, anyway?

Dont rub it in.

Bill looked around, half-shaved, and then went on talking into the
mirror while he lathered his face.

Didnt you send him with a letter to me in New York last winter? Thank
God, Im a travelling man. Havent you got some more Jewish friends you
could bring along? He rubbed his chin with his thumb, looked at it, and
then started scraping again.

Youve got some fine ones yourself.

Oh, yes. Ive got some darbs. But not alongside of this Robert Cohn.
The funny thing is hes nice, too. I like him. But hes just so awful.

He can be damn nice.

I know it. Thats the terrible part.

I laughed.

Yes. Go on and laugh, said Bill. You werent out with him last night
until two oclock.

Was he very bad?

Awful. Whats all this about him and Brett, anyway? Did she ever have
anything to do with him?

He raised his chin up and pulled it from side to side.

Sure. She went down to San Sebastian with him.

What a damn-fool thing to do. Why did she do that?

She wanted to get out of town and she cant go anywhere alone. She said
she thought it would be good for him.

What bloody-fool things people do. Why didnt she go off with some of
her own people? Or you?he slurred that overor me? Why not me? He
looked at his face carefully in the glass, put a big dab of lather on
each cheek-bone. Its an honest face. Its a face any woman would be
safe with.

Shed never seen it.

She should have. All women should see it. Its a face that ought to be
thrown on every screen in the country. Every woman ought to be given a
copy of this face as she leaves the altar. Mothers should tell their
daughters about this face. My sonhe pointed the razor at mego west
with this face and grow up with the country.

He ducked down to the bowl, rinsed his face with cold water, put on some
alcohol, and then looked at himself carefully in the glass, pulling down
his long upper lip.

My God! he said, isnt it an awful face?

He looked in the glass.

And as for this Robert Cohn, Bill said, he makes me sick, and he can
go to hell, and Im damn glad hes staying here so we wont have him
fishing with us.

Youre damn right.

Were going trout-fishing. Were going trout-fishing in the Irati
River, and were going to get tight now at lunch on the wine of the
country, and then take a swell bus ride.

Come on. Lets go over to the Irua and start, I said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   11


It was baking hot in the square when we came out after lunch with our
bags and the rod-case to go to Burguete. People were on top of the bus,
and others were climbing up a ladder. Bill went up and Robert sat beside
Bill to save a place for me, and I went back in the hotel to get a
couple of bottles of wine to take with us. When I came out the bus was
crowded. Men and women were sitting on all the baggage and boxes on top,
and the women all had their fans going in the sun. It certainly was hot.
Robert climbed down and I fitted into the place he had saved on the one
wooden seat that ran across the top.

Robert Cohn stood in the shade of the arcade waiting for us start. A
Basque with a big leather wine-bag in his lap lay across the top of the
bus in front of our seat, leaning back against our legs. He offered the
wine-skin to Bill and to me, and when I tipped it up to drink he
imitated the sound of a klaxon motor-horn so well and so suddenly that I
spilled some of the wine, and everybody laughed. He apologized and made
me take another drink. He made the klaxon again a little later, and it
fooled me the second time. He was very good at it. The Basques liked it.
The man next to Bill was talking to him in Spanish and Bill was not
getting it, so he offered the man one of the bottles of wine. The man
waved it away. He said it was too hot and he had drunk too much at
lunch. When Bill offered the bottle the second time he took a long
drink, and then the bottle went all over that part of the bus. Every one
took a drink very politely, and then they made us cork it up and put it
away. They all wanted us to drink from their leather wine-bottles. They
were peasants going up into the hills.

Finally, after a couple more false klaxons, the bus started, and Robert
Cohn waved good-by to us, and all the Basques waved good-by to him. As
soon as we started out on the road outside of town it was cool. It felt
nice riding high up and close under the trees. The bus went quite fast
and made a good breeze, and as we went out along the road with the dust
powdering the trees and down the hill, we had a fine view, back through
the trees, of the town rising up from the bluff above the river. The
Basque lying against my knees pointed out the view with the neck of the
wine-bottle, and winked at us. He nodded his head.

Pretty nice, eh?

These Basques are swell people, Bill said.

The Basque lying against my legs was tanned the color of saddle-leather.
He wore a black smock like all the rest. There were wrinkles in his
tanned neck. He turned around and offered his wine-bag to Bill. Bill
handed him one of our bottles. The Basque wagged a forefinger at him and
handed the bottle back, slapping in the cork with the palm of his hand.
He shoved the wine-bag up.

Arriba! Arriba! he said. Lift it up.

Bill raised the wine-skin and let the stream of wine spurt out and into
his mouth, his head tipped back. When he stopped drinking and tipped the
leather bottle down a few drops ran down his chin.

No! No! several Basques said. Not like that. One snatched the bottle
away from the owner, who was himself about to give a demonstration. He
was a young fellow and he held the wine-bottle at full arms length and
raised it high up, squeezing the leather bag with his hand so the stream
of wine hissed into his mouth. He held the bag out there, the wine
making a flat, hard trajectory into his mouth, and he kept on swallowing
smoothly and regularly.

Hey! the owner of the bottle shouted. Whose wine is that?

The drinker waggled his little finger at him and smiled at us with his
eyes. Then he bit the stream off sharp, made a quick lift with the
wine-bag and lowered it down to the owner. He winked at us. The owner
shook the wine-skin sadly.

We passed through a town and stopped in front of the posada, and the
driver took on several packages. Then we started on again, and outside
the town the road commenced to mount. We were going through farming
country with rocky hills that sloped down into the fields. The
grain-fields went up the hillsides. Now as we went higher there was a
wind blowing the grain. The road was white and dusty, and the dust rose
under the wheels and hung in the air behind us. The road climbed up into
the hills and left the rich grain-fields below. Now there were only
patches of grain on the bare hillsides and on each side of the
water-courses. We turned sharply out to the side of the road to give
room to pass to a long string of six mules, following one after the
other, hauling a high-hooded wagon loaded with freight. The wagon and
the mules were covered with dust. Close behind was another string of
mules and another wagon. This was loaded with lumber, and the arriero
driving the mules leaned back and put on the thick wooden brakes as we
passed. Up here the country was quite barren and the hills were rocky
and hard-baked clay furrowed by the rain.

We came around a curve into a town, and on both sides opened out a
sudden green valley. A stream went through the centre of the town and
fields of grapes touched the houses.

The bus stopped in front of a posada and many of the passengers got
down, and a lot of the baggage was unstrapped from the roof from under
the big tarpaulins and lifted down. Bill and I got down and went into
the posada. There was a low, dark room with saddles and harness, and
hay-forks made of white wood, and clusters of canvas rope-soled shoes
and hams and slabs of bacon and white garlics and long sausages hanging
from the roof. It was cool and dusky, and we stood in front of a long
wooden counter with two women behind it serving drinks. Behind them were
shelves stacked with supplies and goods.

We each had an aguardiente and paid forty centimes for the two drinks. I
gave the woman fifty centimes to make a tip, and she gave me back the
copper piece, thinking I had misunderstood the price.

Two of our Basques came in and insisted on buying a drink. So they
bought a drink and then we bought a drink, and then they slapped us on
the back and bought another drink. Then we bought, and then we all went
out into the sunlight and the heat, and climbed back on top of the bus.
There was plenty of room now for every one to sit on the seat, and the
Basque who had been lying on the tin roof now sat between us. The woman
who had been serving drinks came out wiping her hands on her apron and
talked to somebody inside the bus. Then the driver came out swinging two
flat leather mail-pouches and climbed up, and everybody waving we
started off.

The road left the green valley at once, and we were up in the hills
again. Bill and the wine-bottle Basque were having a conversation. A man
leaned over from the other side of the seat and asked in English:
Youre Americans?

Sure.

I been there, he said. Forty years ago.

He was an old man, as brown as the others, with the stubble of a white
beard.

How was it?

What you say?

How was America?

Oh, I was in California. It was fine.

Why did you leave?

What you say?

Why did you come back here?

Oh! I come back to get married. I was going to go back but my wife she
dont like to travel. Where you from?

Kansas City.

I been there, he said. I been in Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City,
Denver, Los Angeles, Salt Lake City.

He named them carefully.

How long were you over?

Fifteen years. Then I come back and got married.

Have a drink?

All right, he said. You cant get this in America, eh?

Theres plenty if you can pay for it.

What you come over here for?

Were going to the fiesta at Pamplona.

You like the bull-fights?

Sure. Dont you?

Yes, he said. I guess I like them.

Then after a little:

Where you go now?

Up to Burguete to fish.

Well, he said, I hope you catch something.

He shook hands and turned around to the back seat again. The other
Basques had been impressed. He sat back comfortably and smiled at me
when I turned around to look at the country. But the effort of talking
American seemed to have tired him. He did not say anything after that.

The bus climbed steadily up the road. The country was barren and rocks
stuck up through the clay. There was no grass beside the road. Looking
back we could see the country spread out below. Far back the fields were
squares of green and brown on the hillsides. Making the horizon were the
brown mountains. They were strangely shaped. As we climbed higher the
horizon kept changing. As the bus ground slowly up the road we could see
other mountains coming up in the south. Then the road came over the
crest, flattened out, and went into a forest. It was a forest of cork
oaks, and the sun came through the trees in patches, and there were
cattle grazing back in the trees. We went through the forest and the
road came out and turned along a rise of land, and out ahead of us was a
rolling green plain, with dark mountains beyond it. These were not like
the brown, heat-baked mountains we had left behind. These were wooded
and there were clouds coming down from them. The green plain stretched
off. It was cut by fences and the white of the road showed through the
trunks of a double line of trees that crossed the plain toward the
north. As we came to the edge of the rise we saw the red roofs and white
houses of Burguete ahead strung out on the plain, and away off on the
shoulder of the first dark mountain was the gray metal-sheathed roof of
the monastery of Roncesvalles.

Theres Roncevaux, I said.

Where?

Way off there where the mountain starts.

Its cold up here, Bill said.

Its high, I said. It must be twelve hundred metres.

Its awful cold, Bill said.

The bus levelled down onto the straight line of road that ran to
Burguete. We passed a crossroads and crossed a bridge over a stream. The
houses of Burguete were along both sides of the road. There were no
side-streets. We passed the church and the school-yard, and the bus
stopped. We got down and the driver handed down our bags and the
rod-case. A carabineer in his cocked hat and yellow leather cross-straps
came up.

Whats in there? he pointed to the rod-case.

I opened it and showed him. He asked to see our fishing permits and I
got them out. He looked at the date and then waved us on.

Is that all right? I asked.

Yes. Of course.

We went up the street, past the whitewashed stone houses, families
sitting in their doorways watching us, to the inn.

The fat woman who ran the inn came out from the kitchen and shook hands
with us. She took off her spectacles, wiped them, and put them on again.
It was cold in the inn and the wind was starting to blow outside. The
woman sent a girl up-stairs with us to show the room. There were two
beds, a washstand, a clothes-chest, and a big, framed steel-engraving of
Nuestra Seora de Roncesvalles. The wind was blowing against the
shutters. The room was on the north side of the inn. We washed, put on
sweaters, and came down-stairs into the dining-room. It had a stone
floor, low ceiling, and was oak-panelled. The shutters were up and it
was so cold you could see your breath.

My God! said Bill. It cant be this cold to-morrow. Im not going to
wade a stream in this weather.

There was an upright piano in the far corner of the room beyond the
wooden tables and Bill went over and started to play.

I got to keep warm, he said.

I went out to find the woman and ask her how much the room and board
was. She put her hands under her apron and looked away from me.

Twelve pesetas.

Why, we only paid that in Pamplona.

She did not say anything, just took off her glasses and wiped them on
her apron.

Thats too much, I said. We didnt pay more than that at a big
hotel.

Weve put in a bathroom.

Havent you got anything cheaper?

Not in the summer. Now is the big season.

We were the only people in the inn. Well, I thought, its only a few
days.

Is the wine included?

Oh, yes.

Well, I said. Its all right.

I went back to Bill. He blew his breath at me to show how cold it was,
and went on playing. I sat at one of the tables and looked at the
pictures on the wall. There was one panel of rabbits, dead, one of
pheasants, also dead, and one panel of dead ducks. The panels were all
dark and smoky-looking. There was a cupboard full of liqueur bottles. I
looked at them all. Bill was still playing. How about a hot rum punch?
he said. This isnt going to keep me warm permanently.

I went out and told the woman what a rum punch was and how to make it.
In a few minutes a girl brought a stone pitcher, steaming, into the
room. Bill came over from the piano and we drank the hot punch and
listened to the wind.

There isnt too much rum in that.

I went over to the cupboard and brought the rum bottle and poured a
half-tumblerful into the pitcher.

Direct action, said Bill. It beats legislation.

The girl came in and laid the table for supper.

It blows like hell up here, Bill said.

The girl brought in a big bowl of hot vegetable soup and the wine. We
had fried trout afterward and some sort of a stew and a big bowl full of
wild strawberries. We did not lose money on the wine, and the girl was
shy but nice about bringing it. The old woman looked in once and counted
the empty bottles.

After supper we went up-stairs and smoked and read in bed to keep warm.
Once in the night I woke and heard the wind blowing. It felt good to be
warm and in bed.




                                CHAPTER
                                   12


When I woke in the morning I went to the window and looked out. It had
cleared and there were no clouds on the mountains. Outside under the
window were some carts and an old diligence, the wood of the roof
cracked and split by the weather. It must have been left from the days
before the motor-buses. A goat hopped up on one of the carts and then to
the roof of the diligence. He jerked his head at the other goats below
and when I waved at him he bounded down.

Bill was still sleeping, so I dressed, put on my shoes outside in the
hall, and went down-stairs. No one was stirring down-stairs, so I
unbolted the door and went out. It was cool outside in the early morning
and the sun had not yet dried the dew that had come when the wind died
down. I hunted around in the shed behind the inn and found a sort of
mattock, and went down toward the stream to try and dig some worms for
bait. The stream was clear and shallow but it did not look trouty. On
the grassy bank where it was damp I drove the mattock into the earth and
loosened a chunk of sod. There were worms underneath. They slid out of
sight as I lifted the sod and I dug carefully and got a good many.
Digging at the edge of the damp ground I filled two empty tobacco-tins
with worms and sifted dirt onto them. The goats watched me dig.

When I went back into the inn the woman was down in the kitchen, and I
asked her to get coffee for us, and that we wanted a lunch. Bill was
awake and sitting on the edge of the bed.

I saw you out of the window, he said. Didnt want to interrupt you.
What were you doing? Burying your money?

You lazy bum!

Been working for the common good? Splendid. I want you to do that every
morning.

Come on, I said. Get up.

What? Get up? I never get up.

He climbed into bed and pulled the sheet up to his chin.

Try and argue me into getting up.

I went on looking for the tackle and putting it all together in the
tackle-bag.

Arent you interested? Bill asked.

Im going down and eat.

Eat? Why didnt you say eat? I thought you just wanted me to get up for
fun. Eat? Fine. Now youre reasonable. You go out and dig some more
worms and Ill be right down.

Oh, go to hell!

Work for the good of all. Bill stepped into his underclothes. Show
irony and pity.

I started out of the room with the tackle-bag, the nets, and the
rod-case.

Hey! come back!

I put my head in the door.

Arent you going to show a little irony and pity?

I thumbed my nose.

Thats not irony.

As I went down-stairs I heard Bill singing, Irony and Pity. When youre
feeling . . . Oh, Give them Irony and Give them Pity. Oh, give them
Irony. When theyre feeling . . . Just a little irony. Just a little
pity . . . He kept on singing until he came down-stairs. The tune was:
The Bells are Ringing for Me and my Gal. I was reading a week-old
Spanish paper.

Whats all this irony and pity?

What? Dont you know about Irony and Pity?

No. Who got it up?

Everybody. Theyre mad about it in New York. Its just like the
Fratellinis used to be.

The girl came in with the coffee and buttered toast. Or, rather, it was
bread toasted and buttered.

Ask her if shes got any jam, Bill said. Be ironical with her.

Have you got any jam?

Thats not ironical. I wish I could talk Spanish.

The coffee was good and we drank it out of big bowls. The girl brought
in a glass dish of raspberry jam.

Thank you.

Hey! thats not the way, Bill said. Say something ironical. Make some
crack about Primo de Rivera.

I could ask her what kind of a jam they think theyve gotten into in
the Riff.

Poor, said Bill. Very poor. You cant do it. Thats all. You dont
understand irony. You have no pity. Say something pitiful.

Robert Cohn.

Not so bad. Thats better. Now why is Cohn pitiful? Be ironic.

He took a big gulp of coffee.

Aw, hell! I said. Its too early in the morning.

There you go. And you claim you want to be a writer, too. Youre only a
newspaper man. An expatriated newspaper man. You ought to be ironical
the minute you get out of bed. You ought to wake up with your mouth full
of pity.

Go on, I said. Who did you get this stuff from?

Everybody. Dont you read? Dont you ever see anybody? You know what
you are? Youre an expatriate. Why dont you live in New York? Then
youd know these things. What do you want me to do? Come over here and
tell you every year?

Take some more coffee, I said.

Good. Coffee is good for you. Its the caffeine in it. Caffeine, we are
here. Caffeine puts a man on her horse and a woman in his grave. You
know whats the trouble with you? Youre an expatriate. One of the worst
type. Havent you heard that? Nobody that ever left their own country
ever wrote anything worth printing. Not even in the newspapers.

He drank the coffee.

Youre an expatriate. Youve lost touch with the soil. You get
precious. Fake European standards have ruined you. You drink yourself to
death. You become obsessed by sex. You spend all your time talking, not
working. You are an expatriate, see? You hang around cafs.

It sounds like a swell life, I said. When do I work?

You dont work. One group claims women support you. Another group
claims youre impotent.

No, I said. I just had an accident.

Never mention that, Bill said. Thats the sort of thing that cant be
spoken of. Thats what you ought to work up into a mystery. Like Henrys
bicycle.

He had been going splendidly, but he stopped. I was afraid he thought he
had hurt me with that crack about being impotent. I wanted to start him
again.

It wasnt a bicycle, I said. He was riding horseback.

I heard it was a tricycle.

Well, I said. A plane is sort of like a tricycle. The joystick works
the same way.

But you dont pedal it.

No, I said, I guess you dont pedal it.

Lets lay off that, Bill said.

All right. I was just standing up for the tricycle.

I think hes a good writer, too, Bill said. And youre a hell of a
good guy. Anybody ever tell you you were a good guy?

Im not a good guy.

Listen. Youre a hell of a good guy, and Im fonder of you than anybody
on earth. I couldnt tell you that in New York. Itd mean I was a
faggot. That was what the Civil War was about. Abraham Lincoln was a
faggot. He was in love with General Grant. So was Jefferson Davis.
Lincoln just freed the slaves on a bet. The Dred Scott case was framed
by the Anti-Saloon League. Sex explains it all. The Colonels Lady and
Judy OGrady are Lesbians under their skin.

He stopped.

Want to hear some more?

Shoot, I said.

I dont know any more. Tell you some more at lunch.

Old Bill, I said.

You bum!

We packed the lunch and two bottles of wine in the rucksack, and Bill
put it on. I carried the rod-case and the landing-nets slung over my
back. We started up the road and then went across a meadow and found a
path that crossed the fields and went toward the woods on the slope of
the first hill. We walked across the fields on the sandy path. The
fields were rolling and grassy and the grass was short from the sheep
grazing. The cattle were up in the hills. We heard their bells in the
woods.

The path crossed a stream on a foot-log. The log was surfaced off, and
there was a sapling bent across for a rail. In the flat pool beside the
stream tadpoles spotted the sand. We went up a steep bank and across the
rolling fields. Looking back we saw Burguete, white houses and red
roofs, and the white road with a truck going along it and the dust
rising.

Beyond the fields we crossed another faster-flowing stream. A sandy road
led down to the ford and beyond into the woods. The path crossed the
stream on another foot-log below the ford, and joined the road, and we
went into the woods.

It was a beech wood and the trees were very old. Their roots bulked
above the ground and the branches were twisted. We walked on the road
between the thick trunks of the old beeches and the sunlight came
through the leaves in light patches on the grass. The trees were big,
and the foliage was thick but it was not gloomy. There was no
undergrowth, only the smooth grass, very green and fresh, and the big
gray trees well spaced as though it were a park.

This is country, Bill said.

The road went up a hill and we got into thick woods, and the road kept
on climbing. Sometimes it dipped down but rose again steeply. All the
time we heard the cattle in the woods. Finally, the road came out on the
top of the hills. We were on the top of the height of land that was the
highest part of the range of wooded hills we had seen from Burguete.
There were wild strawberries growing on the sunny side of the ridge in a
little clearing in the trees.

Ahead the road came out of the forest and went along the shoulder of the
ridge of hills. The hills ahead were not wooded, and there were great
fields of yellow gorse. Way off we saw the steep bluffs, dark with trees
and jutting with gray stone, that marked the course of the Irati River.

We have to follow this road along the ridge, cross these hills, go
through the woods on the far hills, and come down to the Irati valley,
I pointed out to Bill.

Thats a hell of a hike.

Its too far to go and fish and come back the same day, comfortably.

Comfortably. Thats a nice word. Well have to go like hell to get
there and back and have any fishing at all.

It was a long walk and the country was very fine, but we were tired when
we came down the steep road that led out of the wooded hills into the
valley of the Rio de la Fabrica.

The road came out from the shadow of the woods into the hot sun. Ahead
was a river-valley. Beyond the river was a steep hill. There was a field
of buckwheat on the hill. We saw a white house under some trees on the
hillside. It was very hot and we stopped under some trees beside a dam
that crossed the river.

Bill put the pack against one of the trees and we jointed up the rods,
put on the reels, tied on leaders, and got ready to fish.

Youre sure this thing has trout in it? Bill asked.

Its full of them.

Im going to fish a fly. You got any McGintys?

Theres some in there.

You going to fish bait?

Yeah. Im going to fish the dam here.

Well, Ill take the fly-book, then. He tied on a fly. Whered I
better go? Up or down?

Down is the best. Theyre plenty up above, too.

Bill went down the bank.

Take a worm can.

No, I dont want one. If they wont take a fly Ill just flick it
around.

Bill was down below watching the stream.

Say, he called up against the noise of the dam. How about putting the
wine in that spring up the road?

All right, I shouted. Bill waved his hand and started down the stream.
I found the two wine-bottles in the pack, and carried them up the road
to where the water of a spring flowed out of an iron pipe. There was a
board over the spring and I lifted it and, knocking the corks firmly
into the bottles, lowered them down into the water. It was so cold my
hand and wrist felt numbed. I put back the slab of wood, and hoped
nobody would find the wine.

I got my rod that was leaning against the tree, took the bait-can and
landing-net, and walked out onto the dam. It was built to provide a head
of water for driving logs. The gate was up, and I sat on one of the
squared timbers and watched the smooth apron of water before the river
tumbled into the falls. In the white water at the foot of the dam it was
deep. As I baited up, a trout shot up out of the white water into the
falls and was carried down. Before I could finish baiting, another trout
jumped at the falls, making the same lovely arc and disappearing into
the water that was thundering down. I put on a good-sized sinker and
dropped into the white water close to the edge of the timbers of the
dam.

I did not feel the first trout strike. When I started to pull up I felt
that I had one and brought him, fighting and bending the rod almost
double, out of the boiling water at the foot of the falls, and swung him
up and onto the dam. He was a good trout, and I banged his head against
the timber so that he quivered out straight, and then slipped him into
my bag.

While I had him on, several trout had jumped at the falls. As soon as I
baited up and dropped in again I hooked another and brought him in the
same way. In a little while I had six. They were all about the same
size. I laid them out, side by side, all their heads pointing the same
way, and looked at them. They were beautifully colored and firm and hard
from the cold water. It was a hot day, so I slit them all and shucked
out the insides, gills and all, and tossed them over across the river. I
took the trout ashore, washed them in the cold, smoothly heavy water
above the dam, and then picked some ferns and packed them all in the
bag, three trout on a layer of ferns, then another layer of fems, then
three more trout, and then covered them with ferns. They looked nice in
the ferns, and now the bag was bulky, and I put it in the shade of the
tree.

It was very hot on the dam, so I put my worm-can in the shade with the
bag, and got a book out of the pack and settled down under the tree to
read until Bill should come up for lunch.

It was a little past noon and there was not much shade, but I sat
against the trunk of two of the trees that grew together, and read. The
book was something by A. E. W. Mason, and I was reading a wonderful
story about a man who had been frozen in the Alps and then fallen into a
glacier and disappeared, and his bride was going to wait twenty-four
years exactly for his body to come out on the moraine, while her true
love waited too, and they were still waiting when Bill came up.

Get any? he asked. He had his rod and his bag and his net all in one
hand, and he was sweating. I hadnt heard him come up, because of the
noise from the dam.

Six. What did you get?

Bill sat down, opened up his bag, laid a big trout on the grass. He took
out three more, each one a little bigger than the last, and laid them
side by side in the shade from the tree. His face was sweaty and happy.

How are yours?

Smaller.

Lets see them.

Theyre packed.

How big are they really?

Theyre all about the size of your smallest.

Youre not holding out on me?

I wish I were.

Get them all on worms?

Yes.

You lazy bum!

Bill put the trout in the bag and started for the river, swinging the
open bag. He was wet from the waist down and I knew he must have been
wading the stream.

I walked up the road and got out the two bottles of wine. They were
cold. Moisture beaded on the bottles as I walked back to the trees. I
spread the lunch on a newspaper, and uncorked one of the bottles and
leaned the other against a tree. Bill came up drying his hands, his bag
plump with ferns.

Lets see that bottle, he said. He pulled the cork, and tipped up the
bottle and drank. Whew! That makes my eyes ache.

Lets try it.

The wine was icy cold and tasted faintly rusty.

Thats not such filthy wine, Bill said.

The cold helps it, I said.

We unwrapped the little parcels of lunch.

Chicken.

Theres hard-boiled eggs.

Find any salt?

First the egg, said Bill. Then the chicken. Even Bryan could see
that.

Hes dead. I read it in the paper yesterday.

No. Not really?

Yes. Bryans dead.

Bill laid down the egg he was peeling.

Gentlemen, he said, and unwrapped a drumstick from a piece of
newspaper. I reverse the order. For Bryans sake. As a tribute to the
Great Commoner. First the chicken; then the egg.

Wonder what day God created the chicken?

Oh, said Bill, sucking the drumstick, how should we know? We should
not question. Our stay on earth is not for long. Let us rejoice and
believe and give thanks.

Eat an egg.

Bill gestured with the drumstick in one hand and the bottle of wine in
the other.

Let us rejoice in our blessings. Let us utilize the fowls of the air.
Let us utilize the product of the vine. Will you utilize a little,
brother?

After you, brother.

Bill took a long drink.

Utilize a little, brother, he handed me the bottle. Let us not doubt,
brother. Let us not pry into the holy mysteries of the hen-coop with
simian fingers. Let us accept on faith and simply sayI want you to
join with me in sayingWhat shall we say, brother? He pointed the
drumstick at me and went on. Let me tell you. We will say, and I for
one am proud to sayand I want you to say with me, on your knees,
brother. Let no man be ashamed to kneel here in the great out-of-doors.
Remember the woods were Gods first temples. Let us kneel and say:
Dont eat that, Ladythats Mencken.

Here, I said. Utilize a little of this.

We uncorked the other bottle.

Whats the matter? I said. Didnt you like Bryan?

I loved Bryan, said Bill. We were like brothers.

Where did you know him?

He and Mencken and I all went to Holy Cross together.

And Frankie Fritsch.

Its a lie. Frankie Fritsch went to Fordham.

Well, I said, I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning.

Its a lie, Bill said. I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning myself.

Youre cock-eyed, I said.

On wine?

Why not?

Its the humidity, Bill said. They ought to take this damn humidity
away.

Have another shot.

Is this all weve got?

Only the two bottles.

Do you know what you are? Bill looked at the bottle affectionately.

No, I said.

Youre in the pay of the Anti-Saloon League.

I went to Notre Dame with Wayne B. Wheeler.

Its a lie, said Bill. I went to Austin Business College with Wayne
B. Wheeler. He was class president.

Well, I said, the saloon must go.

Youre right there, old classmate, Bill said. The saloon must go, and
I will take it with me.

Youre cock-eyed.

On wine?

On wine.

Well, maybe I am.

Want to take a nap?

All right.

We lay with our heads in the shade and looked up into the trees.

You asleep?

No, Bill said. I was thinking.

I shut my eyes. It felt good lying on the ground.

Say, Bill said, what about this Brett business?

What about it?

Were you ever in love with her?

Sure.

For how long?

Off and on for a hell of a long time.

Oh, hell! Bill said. Im sorry, fella.

Its all right, I said. I dont give a damn any more.

Really?

Really. Only Id a hell of a lot rather not talk about it.

You arent sore I asked you?

Why the hell should I be?

Im going to sleep, Bill said. He put a newspaper over his face.

Listen, Jake, he said, are you really a Catholic?

Technically.

What does that mean?

I dont know.

All right, Ill go to sleep now, he said. Dont keep me awake by
talking so much.

I went to sleep, too. When I woke up Bill was packing the rucksack. It
was late in the afternoon and the shadow from the trees was long and
went out over the dam. I was stiff from sleeping on the ground.

What did you do? Wake up? Bill asked. Why didnt you spend the
night? I stretched and rubbed my eyes.

I had a lovely dream, Bill said. I dont remember what it was about,
but it was a lovely dream.

I dont think I dreamt.

You ought to dream, Bill said. All our biggest business men have been
dreamers. Look at Ford. Look at President Coolidge. Look at Rockefeller.
Look at Jo Davidson.

I disjointed my rod and Bills and packed them in the rod-case. I put
the reels in the tackle-bag. Bill had packed the rucksack and we put one
of the trout-bags in. I carried the other.

Well, said Bill, have we got everything?

The worms.

Your worms. Put them in there.

He had the pack on his back and I put the worm-cans in one of the
outside flap pockets.

You got everything now?

I looked around on the grass at the foot of the elm-trees.

Yes.

We started up the road into the woods. It was a long walk home to
Burguete, and it was dark when we came down across the fields to the
road, and along the road between the houses of the town, their windows
lighted, to the inn.

We stayed five days at Burguete and had good fishing. The nights were
cold and the days were hot, and there was always a breeze even in the
heat of the day. It was hot enough so that it felt good to wade in a
cold stream, and the sun dried you when you came out and sat on the
bank. We found a stream with a pool deep enough to swim in. In the
evenings we played three-handed bridge with an Englishman named Harris,
who had walked over from Saint Jean Pied de Port and was stopping at the
inn for the fishing. He was very pleasant and went with us twice to the
Irati River. There was no word from Robert Cohn nor from Brett and Mike.




                                CHAPTER
                                   13


One morning I went down to breakfast and the Englishman, Harris, was
already at the table. He was reading the paper through spectacles. He
looked up and smiled.

Good morning, he said. Letter for you. I stopped at the post and they
gave it me with mine.

The letter was at my place at the table, leaning against a coffee-cup.
Harris was reading the paper again. I opened the letter. It had been
forwarded from Pamplona. It was dated San Sebastian, Sunday:

    DEAR JAKE,

    We got here Friday, Brett passed out on the train, so brought
    her here for 3 days rest with old friends of ours. We go to
    Montoya Hotel Pamplona Tuesday, arriving at I dont know what
    hour. Will you send a note by the bus to tell us what to do to
    rejoin you all on Wednesday. All our love and sorry to be late,
    but Brett was really done in and will be quite all right by
    Tues. and is practically so now. I know her so well and try to
    look after her but its not so easy. Love to all the chaps,

                                                          MICHAEL.

What day of the week is it? I asked Harris.

Wednesday, I think. Yes, quite. Wednesday. Wonderful how one loses
track of the days up here in the mountains.

Yes. Weve been here nearly a week.

I hope youre not thinking of leaving?

Yes. Well go in on the afternoon bus, Im afraid.

What a rotten business. I had hoped wed all have another go at the
Irati together.

We have to go _into_ Pamplona. Were meeting people there.

What rotten luck for me. Weve had a jolly time here at Burguete.

Come on in to Pamplona. We can play some bridge there, and theres
going to be a damned fine fiesta.

Id like to. Awfully nice of you to ask me. Id best stop on here,
though. Ive not much more time to fish.

You want those big ones in the Irati.

I say, I do, you know. Theyre enormous trout there.

Id like to try them once more.

Do. Stop over another day. Be a good chap.

We really have to get into town, I said.

What a pity.

After breakfast Bill and I were sitting warming in the sun on a bench
out in front of the inn and talking it over. I saw a girl coming up the
road from the centre of the town. She stopped in front of us and took a
telegram out of the leather wallet that hung against her skirt.

Por ustedes?

I looked at it. The address was: Barnes, Burguete.

Yes. Its for us.

She brought out a book for me to sign, and I gave her a couple of
coppers. The telegram was in Spanish: Vengo Jueves Cohn.

I handed it to Bill.

What does the word Cohn mean? he asked.

What a lousy telegram! I said. He could send ten words for the same
price. I come Thursday. That gives you a lot of dope, doesnt it?

It gives you all the dope thats of interest to Cohn.

Were going in, anyway, I said. Theres no use trying to move Brett
and Mike out here and back before the fiesta. Should we answer it?

We might as well, said Bill. Theres no need for us to be snooty.

We walked up to the post-office and asked for a telegraph blank.

What will we say? Bill asked.

Arriving to-night. Thats enough.

We paid for the message and walked back to the inn. Harris was there and
the three of us walked up to Roncesvalles. We went through the
monastery.

Its a remarkable place, Harris said, when we came out. But you know
Im not much on those sort of places.

Me either, Bill said.

Its a remarkable place, though, Harris said. I wouldnt not have
seen it. Id been intending coming up each day.

It isnt the same as fishing, though, is it? Bill asked. He liked
Harris.

I say not.

We were standing in front of the old chapel of the monastery.

Isnt that a pub across the way? Harris asked. Or do my eyes deceive
me?

It has the look of a pub, Bill said.

It looks to me like a pub, I said.

I say, said Harris, lets utilize it. He had taken up utilizing from
Bill.

We had a bottle of wine apiece. Harris would not let us pay. He talked
Spanish quite well, and the innkeeper would not take our money.

I say. You dont know what its meant to me to have you chaps up here.

Weve had a grand time, Harris.

Harris was a little tight.

I say. Really you dont know how much it means. Ive not had much fun
since the war.

Well fish together again, some time. Dont you forget it, Harris.

We must. We _have_ had such a jolly good time.

How about another bottle around?

Jolly good idea, said Harris.

This is mine, said Bill. Or we dont drink it.

I wish youd let me pay for it. It _does_ give me pleasure, you know.

This is going to give me pleasure, Bill said.

The innkeeper brought in the fourth bottle. We had kept the same
glasses. Harris lifted his glass.

I say. You know this does utilize well.

Bill slapped him on the back.

Good old Harris.

I say. You know my name isnt really Harris. Its Wilson-Harris. All
one name. With a hyphen, you know.

Good old Wilson-Harris, Bill said. We call you Harris because were
so fond of you.

I say, Barnes. You dont know what this all means to me.

Come on and utilize another glass, I said.

Barnes. Really, Barnes, you cant know. Thats all.

Drink up, Harris.

We walked back down the road from Roncesvalles with Harris between us.
We had lunch at the inn and Harris went with us to the bus. He gave us
his card, with his address in London and his club and his business
address, and as we got on the bus he handed us each an envelope. I
opened mine and there were a dozen flies in it. Harris had tied them
himself. He tied all his own flies.

I say, Harris I began.

No, no! he said. He was climbing down from the bus. Theyre not
first-rate flies at all. I only thought if you fished them some time it
might remind you of what a good time we had.

The bus started. Harris stood in front of the post-office. He waved. As
we started along the road he turned and walked back toward the inn.

Say, wasnt that Harris nice? Bill said.

I think he really did have a good time.

Harris? You bet he did.

I wish hed come into Pamplona.

He wanted to fish.

Yes. You couldnt tell how English would mix with each other, anyway.

I suppose not.

We got into Pamplona late in the afternoon and the bus stopped in front
of the Hotel Montoya. Out in the plaza they were stringing
electric-light wires to light the plaza for the fiesta. A few kids came
up when the bus stopped, and a customs officer for the town made all the
people getting down from the bus open their bundles on the sidewalk. We
went into the hotel and on the stairs I met Montoya. He shook hands with
us, smiling in his embarrassed way.

Your friends are here, he said.

Mr. Campbell?

Yes. Mr. Cohn and Mr. Campbell and Lady Ashley.

He smiled as though there were something I would hear about.

When did they get in?

Yesterday. Ive saved you the rooms you had.

Thats fine. Did you give Mr. Campbell the room on the plaza?

Yes. All the rooms we looked at.

Where are our friends now?

I think they went to the pelota.

And how about the bulls?

Montoya smiled. To-night, he said. To-night at seven oclock they
bring in the Villar bulls, and to-morrow come the Miuras. Do you all go
down?

Oh, yes. Theyve never seen a desencajonada.

Montoya put his hand on my shoulder.

Ill see you there.

He smiled again. He always smiled as though bull-fighting were a very
special secret between the two of us; a rather shocking but really very
deep secret that we knew about. He always smiled as though there were
something lewd about the secret to outsiders, but that it was something
that we understood. It would not do to expose it to people who would not
understand.

Your friend, is he aficionado, too? Montoya smiled at Bill.

Yes. He came all the way from New York to see the San Fermines.

Yes? Montoya politely disbelieved. But hes not aficionado like you.

He put his hand on my shoulder again embarrassedly.

Yes, I said. Hes a real aficionado.

But hes not aficionado like you are.

Aficion means passion. An aficionado is one who is passionate about the
bull-fights. All the good bull-fighters stayed at Montoyas hotel; that
is, those with aficion stayed there. The commercial bull-fighters stayed
once, perhaps, and then did not come back. The good ones came each year.
In Montoyas room were their photographs. The photographs were dedicated
to Juanito Montoya or to his sister. The photographs of bull-fighters
Montoya had really believed in were framed. Photographs of bull-fighters
who had been without aficion Montoya kept in a drawer of his desk. They
often had the most flattering inscriptions. But they did not mean
anything. One day Montoya took them all out and dropped them in the
waste-basket. He did not want them around.

We often talked about bulls and bull-fighters. I had stopped at the
Montoya for several years. We never talked for very long at a time. It
was simply the pleasure of discovering what we each felt. Men would come
in from distant towns and before they left Pamplona stop and talk for a
few minutes with Montoya about bulls. These men were aficionados. Those
who were aficionados could always get rooms even when the hotel was
full. Montoya introduced me to some of them. They were always very
polite at first, and it amused them very much that I should be an
American. Somehow it was taken for granted that an American could not
have aficion. He might simulate it or confuse it with excitement, but he
could not really have it. When they saw that I had aficion, and there
was no password, no set questions that could bring it out, rather it was
a sort of oral spiritual examination with the questions always a little
on the defensive and never apparent, there was this same embarrassed
putting the hand on the shoulder, or a Buen hombre. But nearly always
there was the actual touching. It seemed as though they wanted to touch
you to make it certain.

Montoya could forgive anything of a bull-fighter who had aficion. He
could forgive attacks of nerves, panic, bad unexplainable actions, all
sorts of lapses. For one who had aficion he could forgive anything. At
once he forgave me all my friends. Without his ever saying anything they
were simply a little something shameful between us, like the spilling
open of the horses in bull-fighting.

Bill had gone up-stairs as we came in, and I found him washing and
changing in his room.

Well, he said, talk a lot of Spanish?

He was telling me about the bulls coming in to-night.

Lets find the gang and go down.

All right. Theyll probably be at the caf.

Have you got tickets?

Yes. I got them for all the unloadings.

Whats it like? He was pulling his cheek before the glass, looking to
see if there were unshaved patches under the line of the jaw.

Its pretty good, I said. They let the bulls out of the cages one at
a time, and they have steers in the corral to receive them and keep them
from fighting, and the bulls tear in at the steers and the steers run
around like old maids trying to quiet them down.

Do they ever gore the steers?

Sure. Sometimes they go right after them and kill them.

Cant the steers do anything?

No. Theyre trying to make friends.

What do they have them in for?

To quiet down the bulls and keep them from breaking horns against the
stone walls, or goring each other.

Must be swell being a steer.

We went down the stairs and out of the door and walked across the square
toward the Caf Irua. There were two lonely looking ticket-houses
standing in the square. Their windows, marked SOL, SOL Y SOMBRA, and
SOMBRA, were shut. They would not open until the day before the fiesta.

Across the square the white wicker tables and chairs of the Irua
extended out beyond the Arcade to the edge of the street. I looked for
Brett and Mike at the tables. There they were. Brett and Mike and Robert
Cohn. Brett was wearing a Basque beret. So was Mike. Robert Cohn was
bare-headed and wearing his spectacles. Brett saw us coming and waved.
Her eyes crinkled up as we came up to the table.

Hello, you chaps! she called.

Brett was happy. Mike had a way of getting an intensity of feeling into
shaking hands. Robert Cohn shook hands because we were back.

Where the hell have you been? I asked.

I brought them up here, Cohn said.

What rot, Brett said. Wed have gotten here earlier if you hadnt
come.

Youd never have gotten here.

What rot! You chaps are brown. Look at Bill.

Did you get good fishing? Mike asked. We wanted to join you.

It wasnt bad. We missed you.

I wanted to come, Cohn said, but I thought I ought to bring them.

You bring us. What rot.

Was it really good? Mike asked. Did you take many?

Some days we took a dozen apiece. There was an Englishman up there.

Named Harris, Bill said. Ever know him, Mike? He was in the war,
too.

Fortunate fellow, Mike said. What times we had. How I wish those dear
days were back.

Dont be an ass.

Were you in the war, Mike? Cohn asked.

Was I not.

He was a very distinguished soldier, Brett said. Tell them about the
time your horse bolted down Piccadilly.

Ill not. Ive told that four times.

You never told me, Robert Cohn said.

Ill not tell that story. It reflects discredit on me.

Tell them about your medals.

Ill not. That story reflects great discredit on me.

What storys that?

Brett will tell you. She tells all the stories that reflect discredit
on me.

Go on. Tell it, Brett.

Should I?

Ill tell it myself.

What medals have you got, Mike?

I havent got any medals.

You must have some.

I suppose Ive the usual medals. But I never sent in for them. One time
there was this wopping big dinner and the Prince of Wales was to be
there, and the cards said medals will be worn. So naturally I had no
medals, and I stopped at my tailors and he was impressed by the
invitation, and I thought thats a good piece of business, and I said to
him: Youve got to fix me up with some medals. He said: What medals,
sir? And I said: Oh, any medals. Just give me a few medals. So he
said: What medals _have_ you, sir? And I said: How should I know?
Did he think I spent all my time reading the bloody gazette? Just give
me a good lot. Pick them out yourself. So he got me some medals, you
know, miniature medals, and handed me the box, and I put it in my pocket
and forgot it. Well, I went to the dinner, and it was the night theyd
shot Henry Wilson, so the Prince didnt come and the King didnt come,
and no one wore any medals, and all these coves were busy taking off
their medals, and I had mine in my pocket.

He stopped for us to laugh.

Is that all?

Thats all. Perhaps I didnt tell it right.

You didnt, said Brett. But no matter.

We were all laughing.

Ah, yes, said Mike. I know now. It was a damn dull dinner, and I
couldnt stick it, so I left. Later on in the evening I found the box in
my pocket. Whats this? I said. Medals? Bloody military medals? So I cut
them all off their backingyou know, they put them on a stripand gave
them all around. Gave one to each girl. Form of souvenir. They thought I
was hells own shakes of a soldier. Give away medals in a night club.
Dashing fellow.

Tell the rest, Brett said.

Dont you think that was funny? Mike asked. We were all laughing. It
was. I swear it was. Any rate, my tailor wrote me and wanted the medals
back. Sent a man around. Kept on writing for months. Seems some chap had
left them to be cleaned. Frightfully military cove. Set hells own store
by them. Mike paused. Rotten luck for the tailor, he said.

You dont mean it, Bill said. I should think it would have been grand
for the tailor.

Frightfully good tailor. Never believe it to see me now, Mike said. I
used to pay him a hundred pounds a year just to keep him quiet. So he
wouldnt send me any bills. Frightful blow to him when I went bankrupt.
It was right after the medals. Gave his letters rather a bitter tone.

How did you go bankrupt? Bill asked.

Two ways, Mike said. Gradually and then suddenly.

What brought it on?

Friends, said Mike. I had a lot of friends. False friends. Then I had
creditors, too. Probably had more creditors than anybody in England.

Tell them about in the court, Brett said.

I dont remember, Mike said. I was just a little tight.

Tight! Brett exclaimed. You were blind!

Extraordinary thing, Mike said. Met my former partner the other day.
Offered to buy me a drink.

Tell them about your learned counsel, Brett said.

I will not, Mike said. My learned counsel was blind, too. I say this
is a gloomy subject. Are we going down and see these bulls unloaded or
not?

Lets go down.

We called the waiter, paid, and started to walk through the town. I
started off walking with Brett, but Robert Cohn came up and joined her
on the other side. The three of us walked along, past the Ayuntamiento
with the banners hung from the balcony, down past the market and down
past the steep street that led to the bridge across the Arga. There were
many people walking to go and see the bulls, and carriages drove down
the hill and across the bridge, the drivers, the horses, and the whips
rising above the walking people in the street. Across the bridge we
turned up a road to the corrals. We passed a wine-shop with a sign in
the window: Good Wine 30 Centimes A Liter.

Thats where well go when funds get low, Brett said.

The woman standing in the door of the wine-shop looked at us as we
passed. She called to some one in the house and three girls came to the
window and stared. They were staring at Brett.

At the gate of the corrals two men took tickets from the people that
went in. We went in through the gate. There were trees inside and a low,
stone house. At the far end was the stone wall of the corrals, with
apertures in the stone that were like loopholes running all along the
face of each corral. A ladder led up to the top of the wall, and people
were climbing up the ladder and spreading down to stand on the walls
that separated the two corrals. As we came up the ladder, walking across
the grass under the trees, we passed the big, gray painted cages with
the bulls in them. There was one bull in each travelling-box. They had
come by train from a bull-breeding ranch in Castile, and had been
unloaded off flat-cars at the station and brought up here to be let out
of their cages into the corrals. Each cage was stencilled with the name
and the brand of the bull-breeder.

We climbed up and found a place on the wall looking down into the
corral. The stone walls were whitewashed, and there was straw on the
ground and wooden feed-boxes and water-troughs set against the wall.

Look up there, I said.

Beyond the river rose the plateau of the town. All along the old walls
and ramparts people were standing. The three lines of fortifications
made three black lines of people. Above the walls there were heads in
the windows of the houses. At the far end of the plateau boys had
climbed into the trees.

They must think something is going to happen, Brett said.

They want to see the bulls.

Mike and Bill were on the other wall across the pit of the corral. They
waved to us. People who had come late were standing behind us, pressing
against us when other people crowded them.

Why dont they start? Robert Cohn asked.

A single mule was hitched to one of the cages and dragged it up against
the gate in the corral wall. The men shoved and lifted it with crowbars
into position against the gate. Men were standing on the wall ready to
pull up the gate of the corral and then the gate of the cage. At the
other end of the corral a gate opened and two steers came in, swaying
their heads and trotting, their lean flanks swinging. They stood
together at the far end, their heads toward the gate where the bull
would enter.

They dont look happy, Brett said.

The men on top of the wall leaned back and pulled up the door of the
corral. Then they pulled up the door of the cage.

I leaned way over the wall and tried to see into the cage. It was dark.
Some one rapped on the cage with an iron bar. Inside something seemed to
explode. The bull, striking into the wood from side to side with his
horns, made a great noise. Then I saw a dark muzzle and the shadow of
horns, and then, with a clattering on the wood in the hollow box, the
bull charged and came out into the corral, skidding with his forefeet in
the straw as he stopped, his head up, the great hump of muscle on his
neck swollen tight, his body muscles quivering as he looked up at the
crowd on the stone walls. The two steers backed away against the wall,
their heads sunken, their eyes watching the bull.

The bull saw them and charged. A man shouted from behind one of the
boxes and slapped his hat against the planks, and the bull, before he
reached the steer, turned, gathered himself and charged where the man
had been, trying to reach him behind the planks with a half-dozen quick,
searching drives with the right horn.

My God, isnt he beautiful? Brett said. We were looking right down on
him.

Look how he knows how to use his horns, I said. Hes got a left and a
right just like a boxer.

Not really?

You watch.

It goes too fast.

Wait. Therell be another one in a minute.

They had backed up another cage into the entrance. In the far corner a
man, from behind one of the plank shelters, attracted the bull, and
while the bull was facing away the gate was pulled up and a second bull
came out into the corral.

He charged straight for the steers and two men ran out from behind the
planks and shouted, to turn him. He did not change his direction and the
men shouted: Hah! Hah! Toro! and waved their arms; the two steers
turned sideways to take the shock, and the bull drove into one of the
steers.

Dont look, I said to Brett. She was watching, fascinated.

Fine, I said. If it doesnt buck you.

I saw it, she said. I saw him shift from his left to his right horn.

Damn good!

The steer was down now, his neck stretched out, his head twisted, he lay
the way he had fallen. Suddenly the bull left off and made for the other
steer which had been standing at the far end, his head swinging,
watching it all. The steer ran awkwardly and the bull caught him, hooked
him lightly in the flank, and then turned away and looked up at the
crowd on the walls, his crest of muscle rising. The steer came up to him
and made as though to nose at him and the bull hooked perfunctorily. The
next time he nosed at the steer and then the two of them trotted over to
the other bull.

When the next bull came out, all three, the two bulls and the steer,
stood together, their heads side by side, their horns against the
newcomer. In a few minutes the steer picked the new bull up, quieted him
down, and made him one of the herd. When the last two bulls had been
unloaded the herd were all together.

The steer who had been gored had gotten to his feet and stood against
the stone wall. None of the bulls came near him, and he did not attempt
to join the herd.

We climbed down from the wall with the crowd, and had a last look at the
bulls through the loopholes in the wall of the corral. They were all
quiet now, their heads down. We got a carriage outside and rode up to
the caf. Mike and Bill came in half an hour later. They had stopped on
the way for several drinks.

We were sitting in the caf.

Thats an extraordinary business, Brett said.

Will those last ones fight as well as the first? Robert Cohn asked.
They seemed to quiet down awfully fast.

They all know each other, I said. Theyre only dangerous when theyre
alone, or only two or three of them together.

What do you mean, dangerous? Bill said. They all looked dangerous to
me.

They only want to kill when theyre alone. Of course, if you went in
there youd probably detach one of them from the herd, and hed be
dangerous.

Thats too complicated, Bill said. Dont you ever detach me from the
herd, Mike.

I say, Mike said, they _were_ fine bulls, werent they? Did you see
their horns?

Did I not, said Brett. I had no idea what they were like.

Did you see the one hit that steer? Mike asked. That was
extraordinary.

Its no life being a steer, Robert Cohn said.

Dont you think so? Mike said. I would have thought youd loved being
a steer, Robert.

What do you mean, Mike?

They lead such a quiet life. They never say anything and theyre always
hanging about so.

We were embarrassed. Bill laughed. Robert Cohn was angry. Mike went on
talking.

I should think youd love it. Youd never have to say a word. Come on,
Robert. Do say something. Dont just sit there.

I said something, Mike. Dont you remember? About the steers.

Oh, say something more. Say something funny. Cant you see were all
having a good time here?

Come off it, Michael. Youre drunk, Brett said.

Im not drunk. Im quite serious. _Is_ Robert Cohn going to follow
Brett around like a steer all the time?

Shut up, Michael. Try and show a little breeding.

Breeding be damned. Who has any breeding, anyway, except the bulls?
Arent the bulls lovely? Dont you like them, Bill? Why dont you say
something, Robert? Dont sit there looking like a bloody funeral. What
if Brett did sleep with you? Shes slept with lots of better people than
you.

Shut up, Cohn said. He stood up. Shut up, Mike.

Oh, dont stand up and act as though you were going to hit me. That
wont make any difference to me. Tell me, Robert. Why do you follow
Brett around like a poor bloody steer? Dont you know youre not wanted?
I know when Im not wanted. Why dont you know when youre not wanted?
You came down to San Sebastian where you werent wanted, and followed
Brett around like a bloody steer. Do you think thats right?

Shut up. Youre drunk.

Perhaps I am drunk. Why arent you drunk? Why dont you ever get drunk,
Robert? You know you didnt have a good time at San Sebastian because
none of our friends would invite you on any of the parties. You cant
blame them hardly. Can you? I asked them to. They wouldnt do it. You
cant blame them, now. Can you? Now, answer me. Can you blame them?

Go to hell, Mike.

I cant blame them. Can you blame them? Why do you follow Brett around?
Havent you any manners? How do you think it makes _me_ feel?

Youre a splendid one to talk about manners, Brett said. Youve such
lovely manners.

Come on, Robert, Bill said.

What do you follow her around for?

Bill stood up and took hold of Cohn.

Dont go, Mike said. Robert Cohns going to buy a drink.

Bill went off with Cohn. Cohns face was sallow. Mike went on talking. I
sat and listened for a while. Brett looked disgusted.

I say, Michael, you might not be such a bloody ass, she interrupted.
Im not saying hes not right, you know. She turned to me.

The emotion left Mikes voice. We were all friends together.

Im not so damn drunk as I sounded, he said.

I know youre not, Brett said.

Were none of us sober, I said.

I didnt say anything I didnt mean.

But you put it so badly, Brett laughed.

He was an ass, though. He came down to San Sebastian where he damn well
wasnt wanted. He hung around Brett and just _looked_ at her. It made me
damned well sick.

He did behave very badly, Brett said.

Mark you. Bretts had affairs with men before. She tells me all about
everything. She gave me this chap Cohns letters to read. I wouldnt
read them.

Damned noble of you.

No, listen, Jake. Bretts gone off with men. But they werent ever
Jews, and they didnt come and hang about afterward.

Damned good chaps, Brett said. Its all rot to talk about it. Michael
and I understand each other.

She gave me Robert Cohns letters. I wouldnt read them.

You wouldnt read any letters, darling. You wouldnt read mine.

I cant read letters, Mike said. Funny, isnt it?

You cant read anything.

No. Youre wrong there. I read quite a bit. I read when Im at home.

Youll be writing next, Brett said. Come on, Michael. Do buck up.
Youve got to go through with this thing now. Hes here. Dont spoil the
fiesta.

Well, let him behave, then.

Hell behave. Ill tell him.

You tell him, Jake. Tell him either he must behave or get out.

Yes, I said, it would be nice for me to tell him.

Look, Brett. Tell Jake what Robert calls you. That is perfect, you
know.

Oh, no. I cant.

Go on. Were all friends. Arent we all friends, Jake?

I cant tell him. Its too ridiculous.

Ill tell him.

You wont, Michael. Dont be an ass.

He calls her Circe, Mike said. He claims she turns men into swine.
Damn good. I wish I were one of these literary chaps.

Hed be good, you know, Brett said. He writes a good letter.

I know, I said. He wrote me from San Sebastian.

That was nothing, Brett said. He can write a damned amusing letter.

She made me write that. She was supposed to be ill.

I damned well was, too.

Come on, I said, we must go in and eat.

How should I meet Cohn? Mike said.

Just act as though nothing had happened.

Its quite all right with me, Mike said. Im not embarrassed.

If he says anything, just say you were tight.

Quite. And the funny thing is I think I was tight.

Come on, Brett said. Are these poisonous things paid for? I must
bathe before dinner.

We walked across the square. It was dark and all around the square were
the lights from the cafs under the arcades. We walked across the gravel
under the trees to the hotel.

They went up-stairs and I stopped to speak with Montoya.

Well, how did you like the bulls? he asked.

Good. They were nice bulls.

Theyre all rightMontoya shook his headbut theyre not too good.

What didnt you like about them?

I dont know. They just didnt give me the feeling that they were so
good.

I know what you mean.

Theyre all right.

Yes. Theyre all right.

How did your friends like them?

Fine.

Good, Montoya said.

I went up-stairs. Bill was in his room standing on the balcony looking
out at the square. I stood beside him.

Wheres Cohn?

Up-stairs in his room.

How does he feel?

Like hell, naturally. Mike was awful. Hes terrible when hes tight.

He wasnt so tight.

The hell he wasnt. I know what we had before we came to the caf.

He sobered up afterward.

Good. He was terrible. I dont like Cohn, God knows, and I think it was
a silly trick for him to go down to San Sebastian, but nobody has any
business to talk like Mike.

Howd you like the bulls?

Grand. Its grand the way they bring them out.

To-morrow come the Miuras.

When does the fiesta start?

Day after to-morrow.

Weve got to keep Mike from getting so tight. That kind of stuff is
terrible.

Wed better get cleaned up for supper.

Yes. That will be a pleasant meal.

Wont it?

As a matter of fact, supper was a pleasant meal. Brett wore a black,
sleeveless evening dress. She looked quite beautiful. Mike acted as
though nothing had happened. I had to go up and bring Robert Cohn down.
He was reserved and formal, and his face was still taut and sallow, but
he cheered up finally. He could not stop looking at Brett. It seemed to
make him happy. It must have been pleasant for him to see her looking so
lovely, and know he had been away with her and that every one knew it.
They could not take that away from him. Bill was very funny. So was
Michael. They were good together.

It was like certain dinners I remember from the war. There was much
wine, an ignored tension, and a feeling of things coming that you could
not prevent happening. Under the wine I lost the disgusted feeling and
was happy. It seemed they were all such nice people.




                                CHAPTER
                                   14


I do not know what time I got to bed. I remember undressing, putting on
a bathrobe, and standing out on the balcony. I knew I was quite drunk,
and when I came in I put on the light over the head of the bed and
started to read. I was reading a book by Turgenieff. Probably I read the
same two pages over several times. It was one of the stories in A
Sportsmans Sketches. I had read it before, but it seemed quite new.
The country became very clear and the feeling of pressure in my head
seemed to loosen. I was very drunk and I did not want to shut my eyes
because the room would go round and round. If I kept on reading that
feeling would pass.

I heard Brett and Robert Cohn come up the stairs. Cohn said good night
outside the door and went on up to his room. I heard Brett go into the
room next door. Mike was already in bed. He had come in with me an hour
before. He woke as she came in, and they talked together. I heard them
laugh. I turned off the light and tried to go to sleep. It was not
necessary to read any more. I could shut my eyes without getting the
wheeling sensation. But I could not sleep. There is no reason why
because it is dark you should look at things differently from when it is
light. The hell there isnt!

I figured that all out once, and for six months I never slept with the
electric light off. That was another bright idea. To hell with women,
anyway. To hell with you, Brett Ashley.

Women made such swell friends. Awfully swell. In the first place, you
had to be in love with a woman to have a basis of friendship. I had been
having Brett for a friend. I had not been thinking about her side of it.
I had been getting something for nothing. That only delayed the
presentation of the bill. The bill always came. That was one of the
swell things you could count on.

I thought I had paid for everything. Not like the woman pays and pays
and pays. No idea of retribution or punishment. Just exchange of values.
You gave up something and got something else. Or you worked for
something. You paid some way for everything that was any good. I paid my
way into enough things that I liked, so that I had a good time. Either
you paid by learning about them, or by experience, or by taking chances,
or by money. Enjoying living was learning to get your moneys worth and
knowing when you had it. You could get your moneys worth. The world was
a good place to buy in. It seemed like a fine philosophy. In five years,
I thought, it will seem just as silly as all the other fine philosophies
Ive had.

Perhaps that wasnt true, though. Perhaps as you went along you did
learn something. I did not care what it was all about. All I wanted to
know was how to live in it. Maybe if you found out how to live in it you
learned from that what it was all about.

I wished Mike would not behave so terribly to Cohn, though. Mike was a
bad drunk. Brett was a good drunk. Bill was a good drunk. Cohn was never
drunk. Mike was unpleasant after he passed a certain point. I liked to
see him hurt Cohn. I wished he would not do it, though, because
afterward it made me disgusted at myself. That was morality; things that
made you disgusted afterward. No, that must be immorality. That was a
large statement. What a lot of bilge I could think up at night. What
rot, I could hear Brett say it. What rot! When you were with English you
got into the habit of using English expressions in your thinking. The
English spoken languagethe upper classes, anywaymust have fewer
words than the Eskimo. Of course I didnt know anything about the
Eskimo. Maybe the Eskimo was a fine language. Say the Cherokee. I didnt
know anything about the Cherokee, either. The English talked with
inflected phrases. One phrase to mean everything. I liked them, though.
I liked the way they talked. Take Harris. Still Harris was not the upper
classes.

I turned on the light again and read. I read the Turgenieff. I knew that
now, reading it in the oversensitized state of my mind after much too
much brandy, I would remember it somewhere, and afterward it would seem
as though it had really happened to me. I would always have it. That was
another good thing you paid for and then had. Some time along toward
daylight I went to sleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next two days in Pamplona were quiet, and there were no more rows.
The town was getting ready for the fiesta. Workmen put up the gate-posts
that were to shut off the side streets when the bulls were released from
the corrals and came running through the streets in the morning on their
way to the ring. The workmen dug holes and fitted in the timbers, each
timber numbered for its regular place. Out on the plateau beyond the
town employees of the bull-ring exercised picador horses, galloping them
stiff-legged on the hard, sun-baked fields behind the bull-ring. The big
gate of the bull-ring was open, and inside the amphitheatre was being
swept. The ring was rolled and sprinkled, and carpenters replaced
weakened or cracked planks in the barrera. Standing at the edge of the
smooth rolled sand you could look up in the empty stands and see old
women sweeping out the boxes.

Outside, the fence that led from the last street of the town to the
entrance of the bull-ring was already in place and made a long pen; the
crowd would come running down with the bulls behind them on the morning
of the day of the first bull-fight. Out across the plain, where the
horse and cattle fair would be, some gypsies had camped under the trees.
The wine and aguardiente sellers were putting up their booths. One booth
advertised =ANIS DEL TORO=. The cloth sign hung against the
planks in the hot sun. In the big square that was the centre of the town
there was no change yet. We sat in the white wicker chairs on the
terrasse of the caf and watched the motor-buses come in and unload
peasants from the country coming in to the market, and we watched the
buses fill up and start out with peasants sitting with their saddle-bags
full of the things they had bought in the town. The tall gray
motor-buses were the only life of the square except for the pigeons and
the man with a hose who sprinkled the gravelled square and watered the
streets.

In the evening was the paseo. For an hour after dinner every one, all
the good-looking girls, the officers from the garrison, all the
fashionable people of the town, walked in the street on one side of the
square while the caf tables filled with the regular after-dinner crowd.

During the morning I usually sat in the caf and read the Madrid papers
and then walked in the town or out into the country. Sometimes Bill went
along. Sometimes he wrote in his room. Robert Cohn spent the mornings
studying Spanish or trying to get a shave at the barber-shop. Brett and
Mike never got up until noon. We all had a vermouth at the caf. It was
a quiet life and no one was drunk. I went to church a couple of times,
once with Brett. She said she wanted to hear me go to confession, but I
told her that not only was it impossible but it was not as interesting
as it sounded, and, besides, it would be in a language she did not know.
We met Cohn as we came out of church, and although it was obvious he had
followed us, yet he was very pleasant and nice, and we all three went
for a walk out to the gypsy camp, and Brett had her fortune told.

It was a good morning, there were high white clouds above the mountains.
It had rained a little in the night and it was fresh and cool on the
plateau, and there was a wonderful view. We all felt good and we felt
healthy, and I felt quite friendly to Cohn. You could not be upset about
anything on a day like that.

That was the last day before the fiesta.




                                CHAPTER
                                   15


At noon of Sunday, the 6th of July, the fiesta exploded. There is no
other way to describe it. People had been coming in all day from the
country, but they were assimilated in the town and you did not notice
them. The square was as quiet in the hot sun as on any other day. The
peasants were in the outlying wine-shops. There they were drinking,
getting ready for the fiesta. They had come in so recently from the
plains and the hills that it was necessary that they make their shifting
in values gradually. They could not start in paying caf prices. They
got their moneys worth in the wine-shops. Money still had a definite
value in hours worked and bushels of grain sold. Late in the fiesta it
would not matter what they paid, nor where they bought.

Now on the day of the starting of the fiesta of San Fermin they had been
in the wine-shops of the narrow streets of the town since early morning.
Going down the streets in the morning on the way to mass in the
cathedral, I heard them singing through the open doors of the shops.
They were warming up. There were many people at the eleven oclock mass.
San Fermin is also a religious festival.

I walked down the hill from the cathedral and up the street to the caf
on the square. It was a little before noon. Robert Cohn and Bill were
sitting at one of the tables. The marble-topped tables and the white
wicker chairs were gone. They were replaced by cast-iron tables and
severe folding chairs. The caf was like a battleship stripped for
action. To-day the waiters did not leave you alone all morning to read
without asking if you wanted to order something. A waiter came up as
soon as I sat down.

What are you drinking? I asked Bill and Robert.

Sherry, Cohn said.

Jerez, I said to the waiter.

Before the waiter brought the sherry the rocket that announced the
fiesta went up in the square. It burst and there was a gray ball of
smoke high up above the Theatre Gayarre, across on the other side of the
plaza. The ball of smoke hung in the sky like a shrapnel burst, and as I
watched, another rocket came up to it, trickling smoke in the bright
sunlight. I saw the bright flash as it burst and another little cloud of
smoke appeared. By the time the second rocket had burst there were so
many people in the arcade, that had been empty a minute before, that the
waiter, holding the bottle high up over his head, could hardly get
through the crowd to our table. People were coming into the square from
all sides, and down the street we heard the pipes and the fifes and the
drums coming. They were playing the _riau-riau_ music, the pipes shrill
and the drums pounding, and behind them came the men and boys dancing.
When the fifers stopped they all crouched down in the street, and when
the reed-pipes and the fifes shrilled, and the flat, dry, hollow drums
tapped it out again, they all went up in the air dancing. In the crowd
you saw only the heads and shoulders of the dancers going up and down.

In the square a man, bent over, was playing on a reed-pipe, and a crowd
of children were following him shouting, and pulling at his clothes. He
came out of the square, the children following him, and piped them past
the caf and down a side street. We saw his blank pockmarked face as he
went by, piping, the children close behind him shouting and pulling at
him.

He must be the village idiot, Bill said. My God! look at that!

Down the street came dancers. The street was solid with dancers, all
men. They were all dancing in time behind their own fifers and drummers.
They were a club of some sort, and all wore workmens blue smocks, and
red handkerchiefs around their necks, and carried a great banner on two
poles. The banner danced up and down with them as they came down
surrounded by the crowd.

Hurray for Wine! Hurray for the Foreigners! was painted on the banner.

Where are the foreigners? Robert Cohn asked.

Were the foreigners, Bill said.

All the time rockets were going up. The caf tables were all full now.
The square was emptying of people and the crowd was filling the cafs.

Wheres Brett and Mike? Bill asked.

Ill go and get them, Cohn said.

Bring them here.

The fiesta was really started. It kept up day and night for seven days.
The dancing kept up, the drinking kept up, the noise went on. The things
that happened could only have happened during a fiesta. Everything
became quite unreal finally and it seemed as though nothing could have
any consequences. It seemed out of place to think of consequences during
the fiesta. All during the fiesta you had the feeling, even when it was
quiet, that you had to shout any remark to make it heard. It was the
same feeling about any action. It was a fiesta and it went on for seven
days.

That afternoon was the big religious procession. San Fermin was
translated from one church to another. In the procession were all the
dignitaries, civil and religious. We could not see them because the
crowd was too great. Ahead of the formal procession and behind it danced
the _riau-riau_ dancers. There was one mass of yellow shirts dancing up
and down in the crowd. All we could see of the procession through the
closely pressed people that crowded all the side streets and curbs were
the great giants, cigar-store Indians, thirty feet high, Moors, a King
and Queen, whirling and waltzing solemnly to the _riau-riau_.

They were all standing outside the chapel where San Fermin and the
dignitaries had passed in, leaving a guard of soldiers, the giants, with
the men who danced in them standing beside their resting frames, and the
dwarfs moving with their whacking bladders through the crowd. We started
inside and there was a smell of incense and people filing back into the
church, but Brett was stopped just inside the door because she had no
hat, so we went out again and along the street that ran back from the
chapel into town. The street was lined on both sides with people keeping
their place at the curb for the return of the procession. Some dancers
formed a circle around Brett and started to dance. They wore big wreaths
of white garlics around their necks. They took Bill and me by the arms
and put us in the circle. Bill started to dance, too. They were all
chanting. Brett wanted to dance but they did not want her to. They
wanted her as an image to dance around. When the song ended with the
sharp _riau-riau!_ they rushed us into a wine-shop.

We stood at the counter. They had Brett seated on a wine-cask. It was
dark in the wine-shop and full of men singing, hard-voiced singing. Back
of the counter they drew the wine from casks. I put down money for the
wine, but one of the men picked it up and put it back in my pocket.

I want a leather wine-bottle, Bill said.

Theres a place down the street, I said. Ill go get a couple.

The dancers did not want me to go out. Three of them were sitting on the
high wine-cask beside Brett, teaching her to drink out of the
wine-skins. They had hung a wreath of garlics around her neck. Some one
insisted on giving her a glass. Somebody was teaching Bill a song.
Singing it into his ear. Beating time on Bills back.

I explained to them that I would be back. Outside in the street I went
down the street looking for the shop that made leather wine-bottles. The
crowd was packed on the sidewalks and many of the shops were shuttered,
and I could not find it. I walked as far as the church, looking on both
sides of the street. Then I asked a man and he took me by the arm and
led me to it. The shutters were up but the door was open.

Inside it smelled of fresh tanned leather and hot tar. A man was
stencilling completed wine-skins. They hung from the roof in bunches. He
took one down, blew it up, screwed the nozzle tight, and then jumped on
it

See! It doesnt leak.

I want another one, too. A big one.

He took down a big one that would hold a gallon or more, from the roof.
He blew it up, his cheeks puffing ahead of the wine-skin, and stood on
the bota holding on to a chair.

What are you going to do? Sell them in Bayonne?

No. Drink out of them.

He slapped me on the back.

Good man. Eight pesetas for the two. The lowest price.

The man who was stencilling the new ones and tossing them into a pile
stopped.

Its true, he said. Eight pesetas is cheap.

I paid and went out and along the street back to the wine-shop. It was
darker than ever inside and very crowded. I did not see Brett and Bill,
and some one said they were in the back room. At the counter the girl
filled the two wine-skins for me. One held two litres. The other held
five litres. Filling them both cost three pesetas sixty centimos. Some
one at the counter, that I had never seen before, tried to pay for the
wine, but I finally paid for it myself. The man who had wanted to pay
then bought me a drink. He would not let me buy one in return, but said
he would take a rinse of the mouth from the new wine-bag. He tipped the
big five-litre bag up and squeezed it so the wine hissed against the
back of his throat.

All right, he said, and handed back the bag.

In the back room Brett and Bill were sitting on barrels surrounded by
the dancers. Everybody had his arms on everybody elses shoulders, and
they were all singing. Mike was sitting at a table with several men in
their shirt-sleeves, eating from a bowl of tuna fish, chopped onions and
vinegar. They were all drinking wine and mopping up the oil and vinegar
with pieces of bread.

Hello, Jake. Hello! Mike called. Come here. I want you to meet my
friends. Were all having an hors-duvre.

I was introduced to the people at the table. They supplied their names
to Mike and sent for a fork for me.

Stop eating their dinner, Michael, Brett shouted from the
wine-barrels.

I dont want to eat up your meal, I said when some one handed me a
fork.

Eat, he said. What do you think its here for?

I unscrewed the nozzle of the big wine-bottle and handed it around.
Every one took a drink, tipping the wine-skin at arms length.

Outside, above the singing, we could hear the music of the procession
going by.

Isnt that the procession? Mike asked.

Nada, some one said. Its nothing. Drink up. Lift the bottle.

Where did they find you? I asked Mike.

Some one brought me here, Mike said. They said you were here.

Wheres Cohn?

Hes passed out, Brett called. Theyve put him away somewhere.

Where is he?

I dont know.

How should we know, Bill said. I think hes dead.

Hes not dead, Mike said. I know hes not dead. Hes just passed out
on Anis del Mono.

As he said Anis del Mono one of the men at the table looked up, brought
out a bottle from inside his smock, and handed it to me.

No, I said. No, thanks!

Yes. Yes. Arriba! Up with the bottle!

I took a drink. It tasted of licorice and warmed all the way. I could
feel it warming in my stomach.

Where the hell is Cohn?

I dont know, Mike said. Ill ask. Where is the drunken comrade? he
asked in Spanish.

You want to see him?

Yes, I said.

Not me, said Mike. This gent.

The Anis del Mono man wiped his mouth and stood up.

Come on.

In a back room Robert Cohn was sleeping quietly on some wine-casks. It
was almost too dark to see his face. They had covered him with a coat
and another coat was folded under his head. Around his neck and on his
chest was a big wreath of twisted garlics.

Let him sleep, the man whispered. Hes all right.

Two hours later Cohn appeared. He came into the front room still with
the wreath of garlics around his neck. The Spaniards shouted when he
came in. Cohn wiped his eyes and grinned.

I must have been sleeping, he said.

Oh, not at all, Brett said.

You were only dead, Bill said.

Arent we going to go and have some supper? Cohn asked.

Do you want to eat?

Yes. Why not? Im hungry.

Eat those garlics, Robert, Mike said. I say. Do eat those garlics.

Cohn stood there. His sleep had made him quite all right.

Do lets go and eat, Brett said. I must get a bath.

Come on, Bill said. Lets translate Brett to the hotel.

We said good-bye to many people and shook hands with many people and
went out. Outside it was dark.

What time is it do you suppose? Cohn asked.

Its to-morrow, Mike said. Youve been asleep two days.

No, said Cohn, what time is it?

Its ten oclock.

What a lot weve drunk.

You mean what a lot _weve_ drunk. You went to sleep.

Going down the dark streets to the hotel we saw the sky-rockets going up
in the square. Down the side streets that led to the square we saw the
square solid with people, those in the centre all dancing.

It was a big meal at the hotel. It was the first meal of the prices
being doubled for the fiesta, and there were several new courses. After
the dinner we were out in the town. I remember resolving that I would
stay up all night to watch the bulls go through the streets at six
oclock in the morning, and being so sleepy that I went to bed around
four oclock. The others stayed up.

My own room was locked and I could not find the key, so I went up-stairs
and slept on one of the beds in Cohns room. The fiesta was going on
outside in the night, but I was too sleepy for it to keep me awake. When
I woke it was the sound of the rocket exploding that announced the
release of the bulls from the corrals at the edge of town. They would
race through the streets and out to the bull-ring. I had been sleeping
heavily and I woke feeling I was too late. I put on a coat of Cohns and
went out on the balcony. Down below the narrow street was empty. All the
balconies were crowded with people. Suddenly a crowd came down the
street. They were all running, packed close together. They passed along
and up the street toward the bull-ring and behind them came more men
running faster, and then some stragglers who were really running. Behind
them was a little bare space, and then the bulls galloping, tossing
their heads up and down. It all went out of sight around the corner. One
man fell, rolled to the gutter, and lay quiet. But the bulls went right
on and did not notice him. They were all running together.

After they went out of sight a great roar came from the bull-ring. It
kept on. Then finally the pop of the rocket that meant the bulls had
gotten through the people in the ring and into the corrals. I went back
in the room and got into bed. I had been standing on the stone balcony
in bare feet. I knew our crowd must have all been out at the bull-ring.
Back in bed, I went to sleep.

Cohn woke me when he came in. He started to undress and went over and
closed the window because the people on the balcony of the house just
across the street were looking in.

Did you see the show? I asked.

Yes. We were all there.

Anybody get hurt?

One of the bulls got into the crowd in the ring and tossed six or eight
people.

How did Brett like it?

It was all so sudden there wasnt any time for it to bother anybody.

I wish Id been up.

We didnt know where you were. We went to your room but it was locked.

Where did you stay up?

We danced at some club.

I got sleepy, I said.

My gosh! Im sleepy now, Cohn said. Doesnt this thing ever stop?

Not for a week.

Bill opened the door and put his head in.

Where were you, Jake?

I saw them go through from the balcony. How was it?

Grand.

Where you going?

To sleep.

No one was up before noon. We ate at tables set out under the arcade.
The town was full of people. We had to wait for a table. After lunch we
went over to the Irua. It had filled up, and as the time for the
bull-fight came it got fuller, and the tables were crowded closer. There
was a close, crowded hum that came every day before the bull-fight. The
caf did not make this same noise at any other time, no matter how
crowded it was. This hum went on, and we were in it and a part of it.

I had taken six seats for all the fights. Three of them were barreras,
the first row at the ring-side, and three were sobrepuertos, seats with
wooden backs, half-way up the amphitheatre. Mike thought Brett had best
sit high up for her first time, and Cohn wanted to sit with them. Bill
and I were going to sit in the barreras, and I gave the extra ticket to
a waiter to sell. Bill said something to Cohn about what to do and how
to look so he would not mind the horses. Bill had seen one season of
bull-fights.

Im not worried about how Ill stand it. Im only afraid I may be
bored, Cohn said.

You think so?

Dont look at the horses, after the bull hits them, I said to Brett.
Watch the charge and see the picador try and keep the bull off, but
then dont look again until the horse is dead if its been hit.

Im a little nervy about it, Brett said. Im worried whether Ill be
able to go through with it all right.

Youll be all right. Theres nothing but that horse part that will
bother you, and theyre only in for a few minutes with each bull. Just
dont watch when its bad.

Shell be all right, Mike said. Ill look after her.

I dont think youll be bored, Bill said.

Im going over to the hotel to get the glasses and the wine-skin, I
said. See you back here. Dont get cock-eyed.

Ill come along, Bill said. Brett smiled at us.

We walked around through the arcade to avoid the heat of the square.

That Cohn gets me, Bill said. Hes got this Jewish superiority so
strong that he thinks the only emotion hell get out of the fight will
be being bored.

Well watch him with the glasses, I said.

Oh, to hell with him!

He spends a lot of time there.

I want him to stay there.

In the hotel on the stairs we met Montoya.

Come on, said Montoya. Do you want to meet Pedro Romero?

Fine, said Bill. Lets go see him.

We followed Montoya up a flight and down the corridor.

Hes in room number eight, Montoya explained. Hes getting dressed
for the bull-fight.

Montoya knocked on the door and opened it. It was a gloomy room with a
little light coming in from the window on the narrow street. There were
two beds separated by a monastic partition. The electric light was on.
The boy stood very straight and unsmiling in his bull-fighting clothes.
His jacket hung over the back of a chair. They were just finishing
winding his sash. His black hair shone under the electric light. He wore
a white linen shirt and the sword-handler finished his sash and stood up
and stepped back. Pedro Romero nodded, seeming very far away and
dignified when we shook hands. Montoya said something about what great
aficionados we were, and that we wanted to wish him luck. Romero
listened very seriously. Then he turned to me. He was the best-looking
boy I have ever seen.

You go to the bull-fight, he said in English.

You know English, I said, feeling like an idiot.

No, he answered, and smiled.

One of three men who had been sitting on the beds came up and asked us
if we spoke French. Would you like me to interpret for you? Is there
anything you would like to ask Pedro Romero?

We thanked him. What was there that you would like to ask? The boy was
nineteen years old, alone except for his sword-handler, and the three
hangers-on, and the bull-fight was to commence in twenty minutes. We
wished him Mucha suerte, shook hands, and went out. He was standing,
straight and handsome and altogether by himself, alone in the room with
the hangers-on as we shut the door.

Hes a fine boy, dont you think so? Montoya asked.

Hes a good-looking kid, I said.

He looks like a torero, Montoya said. He has the type.

Hes a fine boy.

Well see how he is in the ring, Montoya said.

We found the big leather wine-bottle leaning against the wall in my
room, took it and the field-glasses, locked the door, and went
down-stairs.

It was a good bull-fight. Bill and I were very excited about Pedro
Romero. Montoya was sitting about ten places away. After Romero had
killed his first bull Montoya caught my eye and nodded his head. This
was a real one. There had not been a real one for a long time. Of the
other two matadors, one was very fair and the other was passable. But
there was no comparison with Romero, although neither of his bulls was
much.

Several times during the bull-fight I looked up at Mike and Brett and
Cohn, with the glasses. They seemed to be all right. Brett did not look
upset. All three were leaning forward on the concrete railing in front
of them.

Let me take the glasses, Bill said.

Does Cohn look bored? I asked.

That kike!

Outside the ring, after the bull-fight was over, you could not move in
the crowd. We could not make our way through but had to be moved with
the whole thing, slowly, as a glacier, back to town. We had that
disturbed emotional feeling that always comes after a bull-fight, and
the feeling of elation that comes after a good bull-fight. The fiesta
was going on. The drums pounded and the pipe music was shrill, and
everywhere the flow of the crowd was broken by patches of dancers. The
dancers were in a crowd, so you did not see the intricate play of the
feet. All you saw was the heads and shoulders going up and down, up and
down. Finally, we got out of the crowd and made for the caf. The waiter
saved chairs for the others, and we each ordered an absinthe and watched
the crowd in the square and the dancers.

What do you suppose that dance is? Bill asked.

Its a sort of jota.

Theyre not all the same, Bill said. They dance differently to all
the different tunes.

Its swell dancing.

In front of us on a clear part of the street a company of boys were
dancing. The steps were very intricate and their faces were intent and
concentrated. They all looked down while they danced. Their rope-soled
shoes tapped and spatted on the pavement. The toes touched. The heels
touched. The balls of the feet touched. Then the music broke wildly and
the step was finished and they were all dancing on up the street.

Here come the gentry, Bill said.

They were crossing the street

Hello, men, I said.

Hello, gents! said Brett. You saved us seats? How nice.

I say, Mike said, that Romero whatshisname is somebody. Am I wrong?

Oh, isnt he lovely, Brett said. And those green trousers.

Brett never took her eyes off them.

I say, I must borrow your glasses to-morrow.

How did it go?

Wonderfully! Simply perfect. I say, it is a spectacle!

How about the horses?

I couldnt help looking at them.

She couldnt take her eyes off them, Mike said. Shes an
extraordinary wench.

They do have some rather awful things happen to them, Brett said. I
couldnt look away, though.

Did you feel all right?

I didnt feel badly at all.

Robert Cohn did, Mike put in. You were quite green, Robert.

The first horse did bother me, Cohn said.

You werent bored, were you? asked Bill.

Cohn laughed.

No. I wasnt bored. I wish youd forgive me that.

Its all right, Bill said, so long as you werent bored.

He didnt look bored, Mike said. I thought he was going to be sick.

I never felt that bad. It was just for a minute.

I thought he was going to be sick. You werent bored, were you,
Robert?

Let up on that, Mike. I said I was sorry I said it.

He was, you know. He was positively green.

Oh, shove it along, Michael.

You mustnt ever get bored at your first bull-fight, Robert, Mike
said. It might make such a mess.

Oh, shove it along, Michael, Brett said.

He said Brett was a sadist, Mike said. Bretts not a sadist. Shes
just a lovely, healthy wench.

Are you a sadist, Brett? I asked.

Hope not.

He said Brett was a sadist just because she has a good, healthy
stomach.

Wont be healthy long.

Bill got Mike started on something else than Cohn. The waiter brought
the absinthe glasses.

Did you really like it? Bill asked Cohn.

No, I cant say I liked it. I think its a wonderful show.

Gad, yes! What a spectacle! Brett said.

I wish they didnt have the horse part, Cohn said.

Theyre not important, Bill said. After a while you never notice
anything disgusting.

It is a bit strong just at the start, Brett said. Theres a dreadful
moment for me just when the bull starts for the horse.

The bulls were fine, Cohn said.

They were very good, Mike said.

I want to sit down below, next time. Brett drank from her glass of
absinthe.

She wants to see the bull-fighters close by, Mike said.

They are something, Brett said. That Romero lad is just a child.

Hes a damned good-looking boy, I said. When we were up in his room I
never saw a better-looking kid.

How old do you suppose he is?

Nineteen or twenty.

Just imagine it.

The bull-fight on the second day was much better than on the first.
Brett sat between Mike and me at the barrera, and Bill and Cohn went up
above. Romero was the whole show. I do not think Brett saw any other
bull-fighter. No one else did either, except the hard-shelled
technicians. It was all Romero. There were two other matadors, but they
did not count. I sat beside Brett and explained to Brett what it was all
about. I told her about watching the bull, not the horse, when the bulls
charged the picadors, and got her to watching the picador place the
point of his pic so that she saw what it was all about, so that it
became more something that was going on with a definite end, and less of
a spectacle with unexplained horrors. I had her watch how Romero took
the bull away from a fallen horse with his cape, and how he held him
with the cape and turned him, smoothly and suavely, never wasting the
bull. She saw how Romero avoided every brusque movement and saved his
bulls for the last when he wanted them, not winded and discomposed but
smoothly worn down. She saw how close Romero always worked to the bull,
and I pointed out to her the tricks the other bull-fighters used to make
it look as though they were working closely. She saw why she liked
Romeros cape-work and why she did not like the others.

Romero never made any contortions, always it was straight and pure and
natural in line. The others twisted themselves like corkscrews, their
elbows raised, and leaned against the flanks of the bull after his horns
had passed, to give a faked look of danger. Afterward, all that was
faked turned bad and gave an unpleasant feeling. Romeros bull-fighting
gave real emotion, because he kept the absolute purity of line in his
movements and always quietly and calmly let the horns pass him close
each time. He did not have to emphasize their closeness. Brett saw how
something that was beautiful done close to the bull was ridiculous if it
were done a little way off. I told her how since the death of Joselito
all the bull-fighters had been developing a technic that simulated this
appearance of danger in order to give a fake emotional feeling, while
the bull-fighter was really safe. Romero had the old thing, the holding
of his purity of line through the maximum of exposure, while he
dominated the bull by making him realize he was unattainable, while he
prepared him for the killing.

Ive never seen him do an awkward thing, Brett said.

You wont until he gets frightened, I said.

Hell never be frightened, Mike said. He knows too damned much.

He knew everything when he started. The others cant ever learn what he
was born with.

And God, what looks, Brett said.

I believe, you know, that shes falling in love with this bull-fighter
chap, Mike said.

I wouldnt be surprised.

Be a good chap, Jake. Dont tell her anything more about him. Tell her
how they beat their old mothers.

Tell me what drunks they are.

Oh, frightful, Mike said. Drunk all day and spend all their time
beating their poor old mothers.

He looks that way, Brett said.

Doesnt he? I said.

They had hitched the mules to the dead bull and then the whips cracked,
the men ran, and the mules, straining forward, their legs pushing, broke
into a gallop, and the bull, one horn up, his head on its side, swept a
swath smoothly across the sand and out the red gate.

This next is the last one.

Not really, Brett said. She leaned forward on the barrera. Romero
waved his picadors to their places, then stood, his cape against his
chest, looking across the ring to where the bull would come out.

After it was over we went out and were pressed tight in the crowd.

These bull-fights are hell on one, Brett said. Im limp as a rag.

Oh, youll get a drink, Mike said.

The next day Pedro Romero did not fight. It was Miura bulls, and a very
bad bull-fight. The next day there was no bull-fight scheduled. But all
day and all night the fiesta kept on.




                                CHAPTER
                                   16


In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from
the sea. You could not see the tops of the mountains. The plateau was
dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were
changed. I walked out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad
weather was coming over the mountains from the sea.

The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners
were wet and hung damp against the front of the houses, and in between
the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the
arcades and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and
dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any pause. It was only
driven under cover.

The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting
out of the rain watching the concourse of Basque and Navarrais dancers
and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes
danced down the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp,
and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big, heavy-footed
horses, their costumes wet, the horses coats wet in the rain. The crowd
was in the cafs and the dancers came in, too, and sat, their
tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their
belled caps, and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs
to dry. It was raining hard outside.

I left the crowd in the caf and went over to the hotel to get shaved
for dinner. I was shaving in my room when there was a knock on the door.

Come in, I called.

Montoya walked in.

How are you? he said.

Fine, I said.

No bulls to-day.

No, I said, nothing but rain.

Where are your friends?

Over at the Irua.

Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile.

Look, he said. Do you know the American ambassador?

Yes, I said. Everybody knows the American ambassador.

Hes here in town, now.

Yes, I said. Everybodys seen them.

Ive seen them, too, Montoya said. He didnt say anything. I went on
shaving.

Sit down, I said. Let me send for a drink.

No, I have to go.

I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with
cold water. Montoya was standing there looking more embarrassed.

Look, he said. Ive just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel
that they want Pedro Romero and Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee
to-night after dinner.

Well, I said, it cant hurt Marcial any.

Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this
morning with Marquez. I dont think theyll be back to-night.

Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something.

Dont give Romero the message, I said.

You think so?

Absolutely.

Montoya was very pleased.

I wanted to ask you because you were an American, he said.

Thats what Id do.

Look, said Montoya. People take a boy like that. They dont know what
hes worth. They dont know what he means. Any foreigner can flatter
him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year theyre
through.

Like Algabeno, I said.

Yes, like Algabeno.

Theyre a fine lot, I said. Theres one American woman down here now
that collects bull-fighters.

I know. They only want the young ones.

Yes, I said. The old ones get fat.

Or crazy like Gallo.

Well, I said, its easy. All you have to do is not give him the
message.

Hes such a fine boy, said Montoya. He ought to stay with his own
people. He shouldnt mix in that stuff.

Wont you have a drink? I asked.

No, said Montoya, I have to go. He went out.

I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the
arcades around the square. It was still raining. I looked in at the
Irua for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the
square and back to the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs
dining-room.

They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill
was buying shoe-shines for Mike. Bootblacks opened the street door and
each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike.

This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished, Mike said. I
say, Bill is an ass.

The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in.

Limpia botas? he said to Bill.

No, said Bill. For this Seor.

The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mikes
free shoe that shone already in the electric light.

Bills a yell of laughter, Mike said.

I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little
uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I looked around the room. At
the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me
to come over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost
touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bull-fight critic, a little man
with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was
very pleased. We talked Spanish and the critic knew a little French. I
reached to our table for my wine-bottle, but the critic took my arm.
Romero laughed.

Drink here, he said in English.

He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased
with it, and as we went on talking he brought out words he was not sure
of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for
_Corrida de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious
of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the _lidia_ of a _toro_.
The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bullsthe
French translation is _Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in.
There is no Spanish word for bull-fight.

Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was
born in Ronda. That is not far above Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting
in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it
three years. The bull-fight critic joked him about the number of
_Malagueo_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he said. His
older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in
this hotel. He lived in a smaller hotel with the other people who worked
for Romero. He asked me how many times I had seen him in the ring. I
told him only three. It was really only two, but I did not want to
explain after I had made the mistake.

Where did you see me the other time? In Madrid?

Yes, I lied. I had read the accounts of his two appearances in Madrid
in the bull-fight papers, so I was all right.

The first or the second time?

The first.

I was very bad, he said. The second time I was better. You remember?
He turned to the critic.

He was not at all embarrassed. He talked of his work as something
altogether apart from himself. There was nothing conceited or braggartly
about him.

I like it very much that you like my work, he said. But you havent
seen it yet. To-morrow, if I get a good bull, I will try and show it to
you.

When he said this he smiled, anxious that neither the bull-fight critic
nor I would think he was boasting.

I am anxious to see it, the critic said. I would like to be
convinced.

He doesnt like my work much. Romero turned to me. He was serious.

The critic explained that he liked it very much, but that so far it had
been incomplete.

Wait till to-morrow, if a good one comes out.

Have you seen the bulls for to-morrow? the critic asked me.

Yes. I saw them unloaded.

Pedro Romero leaned forward.

What did you think of them?

Very nice, I said. About twenty-six arrobas. Very short horns.
Havent you seen them?

Oh, yes, said Romero.

They wont weigh twenty-six arrobas, said the critic.

No, said Romero.

Theyve got bananas for horns, the critic said.

You call them bananas? asked Romero. He turned to me and smiled.
_You_ wouldnt call them bananas?

No, I said. Theyre horns all right.

Theyre very short, said Pedro Romero. Very, very short. Still, they
arent bananas.

I say, Jake, Brett called from the next table, you _have_ deserted
us.

Just temporarily, I said. Were talking bulls.

You _are_ superior.

Tell him that bulls have no balls, Mike shouted. He was drunk.

Romero looked at me inquiringly.

Drunk, I said. Borracho! Muy borracho!

You might introduce your friends, Brett said. She had not stopped
looking at Pedro Romero. I asked them if they would like to have coffee
with us. They both stood up. Romeros face was very brown. He had very
nice manners.

I introduced them all around and they started to sit down, but there was
not enough room, so we all moved over to the big table by the wall to
have coffee. Mike ordered a bottle of Fundador and glasses for
everybody. There was a lot of drunken talking.

Tell him I think writing is lousy, Bill said. Go on, tell him. Tell
him Im ashamed of being a writer.

Pedro Romero was sitting beside Brett and listening to her.

Go on. Tell him! Bill said.

Romero looked up smiling.

This gentleman, I said, is a writer.

Romero was impressed. This other one, too, I said, pointing at Cohn.

He looks like Villalta, Romero said, looking at Bill. Rafael, doesnt
he look like Villalta?

I cant see it, the critic said.

Really, Romero said in Spanish. He looks a lot like Villalta. What
does the drunken one do?

Nothing.

Is that why he drinks?

No. Hes waiting to marry this lady.

Tell him bulls have no balls! Mike shouted, very drunk, from the other
end of the table.

What does he say?

Hes drunk.

Jake, Mike called. Tell him bulls have no balls!

You understand? I said.

Yes.

I was sure he didnt, so it was all right.

Tell him Brett wants to see him put on those green pants.

Pipe down, Mike.

Tell him Brett is dying to know how he can get into those pants.

Pipe down.

During this Romero was fingering his glass and talking with Brett. Brett
was talking French and he was talking Spanish and a little English, and
laughing.

Bill was filling the glasses.

Tell him Brett wants to come into

Oh, pipe down, Mike, for Christs sake!

Romero looked up smiling. Pipe down! I know that, he said.

Just then Montoya came into the room. He started to smile at me, then he
saw Pedro Romero with a big glass of cognac in his hand, sitting
laughing between me and a woman with bare shoulders, at a table full of
drunks. He did not even nod.

Montoya went out of the room. Mike was on his feet proposing a toast.
Lets all drink to he began. Pedro Romero, I said. Everybody stood
up. Romero took it very seriously, and we touched glasses and drank it
down, I rushing it a little because Mike was trying to make it clear
that that was not at all what he was going to drink to. But it went off
all right, and Pedro Romero shook hands with every one and he and the
critic went out together.

My God! hes a lovely boy, Brett said. And how I would love to see
him get into those clothes. He must use a shoe-horn.

I started to tell him, Mike began. And Jake kept interrupting me. Why
do you interrupt me? Do you think you talk Spanish better than I do?

Oh, shut up, Mike! Nobody interrupted you.

No, Id like to get this settled. He turned away from me. Do you
think you amount to something, Cohn? Do you think you belong here among
us? People who are out to have a good time? For Gods sake dont be so
noisy, Cohn!

Oh, cut it out, Mike, Cohn said.

Do you think Brett wants you here? Do you think you add to the party?
Why dont you say something?

I said all I had to say the other night, Mike.

Im not one of you literary chaps. Mike stood shakily and leaned
against the table. Im not clever. But I do know when Im not wanted.
Why dont you see when youre not wanted, Cohn? Go away. Go away, for
Gods sake. Take that sad Jewish face away. Dont you think Im right?

He looked at us.

Sure, I said. Lets all go over to the Irua.

No. Dont you think Im right? I love that woman.

Oh, dont start that again. Do shove it along, Michael, Brett said.

Dont you think Im right, Jake?

Cohn still sat at the table. His face had the sallow, yellow look it got
when he was insulted, but somehow he seemed to be enjoying it. The
childish, drunken heroics of it. It was his affair with a lady of title.

Jake, Mike said. He was almost crying. You know Im right. Listen,
you! He turned to Cohn: Go away! Go away now!

But I wont go, Mike, said Cohn.

Then Ill make you! Mike started toward him around the table. Cohn
stood up and took off his glasses. He stood waiting, his face sallow,
his hands fairly low, proudly and firmly waiting for the assault, ready
to do battle for his lady love.

I grabbed Mike. Come on to the caf, I said. You cant hit him here
in the hotel.

Good! said Mike. Good idea!

We started off. I looked back as Mike stumbled up the stairs and saw
Cohn putting his glasses on again. Bill was sitting at the table pouring
another glass of Fundador. Brett was sitting looking straight ahead at
nothing.

Outside on the square it had stopped raining and the moon was trying to
get through the clouds. There was a wind blowing. The military band was
playing and the crowd was massed on the far side of the square where the
fireworks specialist and his son were trying to send up fire balloons. A
balloon would start up jerkily, on a great bias, and be torn by the wind
or blown against the houses of the square. Some fell into the crowd. The
magnesium flared and the fireworks exploded and chased about in the
crowd. There was no one dancing in the square. The gravel was too wet.

Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and
watched Don Manuel Orquito, the fireworks king, standing on a little
platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above
the heads of the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The
wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquitos face was sweaty in
the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and
charged and chased, sputtering and cracking, between the legs of the
people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened,
caught fire, and fell.

Theyre razzing Don Manuel, Bill said.

How do you know hes Don Manuel? Brett said.

His names on the programme. Don Manuel Orquito, the pirotecnico of
esta ciudad.

Globos illuminados, Mike said. A collection of globos illuminados.
Thats what the paper said.

The wind blew the band music away.

I say, I wish one would go up, Brett said. That Don Manuel chap is
furious.

Hes probably worked for weeks fixing them to go off, spelling out
Hail to San Fermin, Bill said.

Globos illuminados, Mike said. A bunch of bloody globos illuminados.

Come on, said Brett. We cant stand here.

Her ladyship wants a drink, Mike said.

How you know things, Brett said.

Inside, the caf was crowded and very noisy. No one noticed us come in.
We could not find a table. There was a great noise going on.

Come on, lets get out of here, Bill said.

Outside the paseo was going in under the arcade. There were some English
and Americans from Biarritz in sport clothes scattered at the tables.
Some of the women stared at the people going by with lorgnons. We had
acquired, at some time, a friend of Bills from Biarritz. She was
staying with another girl at the Grand Hotel. The other girl had a
headache and had gone to bed.

Heres the pub, Mike said. It was the Bar Milano, a small, tough bar
where you could get food and where they danced in the back room. We all
sat down at a table and ordered a bottle of Fundador. The bar was not
full. There was nothing going on.

This is a hell of a place, Bill said.

Its too early.

Lets take the bottle and come back later, Bill said. I dont want to
sit here on a night like this.

Lets go and look at the English, Mike said. I love to look at the
English.

Theyre awful, Bill said. Where did they all come from?

They come from Biarritz, Mike said, They come to see the last day of
the quaint little Spanish fiesta.

Ill festa them, Bill said.

Youre an extraordinarily beautiful girl. Mike turned to Bills
friend. When did you come here?

Come off it, Michael.

I say, she _is_ a lovely girl. Where have I been? Where have I been
looking all this while? Youre a lovely thing. _Have_ we met? Come along
with me and Bill. Were going to festa the English.

Ill festa them, Bill said, What the hell are they doing at this
fiesta?

Come on, Mike said. Just us three. Were going to festa the bloody
English. I hope youre not English? Im Scotch. I hate the English. Im
going to festa them. Come on, Bill.

Through the window we saw them, all three arm in arm, going toward the
caf. Rockets were going up in the square.

Im going to sit here, Brett said.

Ill stay with you, Cohn said.

Oh, dont! Brett said. For Gods sake, go off somewhere. Cant you
see Jake and I want to talk?

I didnt, Cohn said. I thought Id sit here because I felt a little
tight.

What a hell of a reason for sitting with any one. If youre tight, go
to bed. Go on to bed.

Was I rude enough to him? Brett asked. Cohn was gone. My God! Im so
sick of him!

He doesnt add much to the gayety.

He depresses me so.

Hes behaved very badly.

Damned badly. He had a chance to behave so well.

Hes probably waiting just outside the door now.

Yes. He would. You know I do know how he feels. He cant believe it
didnt mean anything.

I know.

Nobody else would behave as badly. Oh, Im so sick of the whole thing.
And Michael. Michaels been lovely, too.

Its been damned hard on Mike.

Yes. But he didnt need to be a swine.

Everybody behaves badly, I said. Give them the proper chance.

You wouldnt behave badly. Brett looked at me.

Id be as big an ass as Cohn, I said.

Darling, dont lets talk a lot of rot.

All right. Talk about anything you like.

Dont be difficult. Youre the only person Ive got, and I feel rather
awful to-night.

Youve got Mike.

Yes, Mike. Hasnt he been pretty?

Well, I said, its been damned hard on Mike, having Cohn around and
seeing him with you.

Dont I know it, darling? Please dont make me feel any worse than I
do.

Brett was nervous as I had never seen her before. She kept looking away
from me and looking ahead at the wall.

Want to go for a walk?

Yes. Come on.

I corked up the Fundador bottle and gave it to the bartender.

Lets have one more drink of that, Brett said. My nerves are rotten.

We each drank a glass of the smooth amontillado brandy.

Come on, said Brett.

As we came out the door I saw Cohn walk out from under the arcade.

He _was_ there, Brett said.

He cant be away from you.

Poor devil!

Im not sorry for him. I hate him, myself.

I hate him, too, she shivered. I hate his damned suffering.

We walked arm in arm down the side street away from the crowd and the
lights of the square. The street was dark and wet, and we walked along
it to the fortifications at the edge of town. We passed wine-shops with
light coming out from their doors onto the black, wet street, and sudden
bursts of music.

Want to go in?

No.

We walked out across the wet grass and onto the stone wall of the
fortifications. I spread a newspaper on the stone and Brett sat down.
Across the plain it was dark, and we could see the mountains. The wind
was high up and took the clouds across the moon. Below us were the dark
pits of the fortifications. Behind were the trees and the shadow of the
cathedral, and the town silhouetted against the moon.

Dont feel bad, I said.

I feel like hell, Brett said. Dont lets talk.

We looked out at the plain. The long lines of trees were dark in the
moonlight. There were the lights of a car on the road climbing the
mountain. Up on the top of the mountain we saw the lights of the fort.
Below to the left was the river. It was high from the rain, and black
and smooth. Trees were dark along the banks. We sat and looked out.
Brett stared straight ahead. Suddenly she shivered.

Its cold.

Want to walk back?

Through the park.

We climbed down. It was clouding over again. In the park it was dark
under the trees.

Do you still love me, Jake?

Yes, I said.

Because Im a goner, Brett said.

How?

Im a goner. Im mad about the Romero boy. Im in love with him, I
think.

I wouldnt be if I were you.

I cant help it. Im a goner. Its tearing me all up inside.

Dont do it.

I cant help it. Ive never been able to help anything.

You ought to stop it.

How can I stop it? I cant stop things. Feel that?

Her hand was trembling.

Im like that all through.

You oughtnt to do it.

I cant help it. Im a goner now, anyway. Dont you see the
difference?

No.

Ive got to do something. Ive got to do something I really want to do.
Ive lost my self-respect.

You dont have to do that.

Oh, darling, dont be difficult. What do you think its meant to have
that damned Jew about, and Mike the way hes acted?

Sure.

I cant just stay tight all the time.

No.

Oh, darling, please stay by me. Please stay by me and see me through
this.

Sure.

I dont say its right. It is right though for me. God knows, Ive
never felt such a bitch.

What do you want me to do?

Come on, Brett said. Lets go and find him.

Together we walked down the gravel path in the park in the dark, under
the trees and then out from under the trees and past the gate into the
street that led into town.

Pedro Romero was in the caf. He was at a table with other bull-fighters
and bull-fight critics. They were smoking cigars. When we came in they
looked up. Romero smiled and bowed. We sat down at a table half-way down
the room.

Ask him to come over and have a drink.

Not yet. Hell come over.

I cant look at him.

Hes nice to look at, I said.

Ive always done just what I wanted.

I know.

I do feel such a bitch.

Well, I said.

My God! said Brett, the things a woman goes through.

Yes?

Oh, I do feel such a bitch.

I looked across at the table. Pedro Romero smiled. He said something to
the other people at his table, and stood up. He came over to our table.
I stood up and we shook hands.

Wont you have a drink?

You must have a drink with me, he said. He seated himself, asking
Bretts permission without saying anything. He had very nice manners.
But he kept on smoking his cigar. It went well with his face.

You like cigars? I asked.

Oh, yes. I always smoke cigars.

It was part of his system of authority. It made him seem older. I
noticed his skin. It was clear and smooth and very brown. There was a
triangular scar on his cheek-bone. I saw he was watching Brett. He felt
there was something between them. He must have felt it when Brett gave
him her hand. He was being very careful. I think he was sure, but he did
not want to make any mistake.

You fight to-morrow? I said.

Yes, he said. Algabeno was hurt to-day in Madrid. Did you hear?

No, I said. Badly?

He shook his head.

Nothing. Here, he showed his hand. Brett reached out and spread the
fingers apart.

Oh! he said in English, you tell fortunes?

Sometimes. Do you mind?

No. I like it. He spread his hand flat on the table. Tell me I live
for always, and be a millionaire.

He was still very polite, but he was surer of himself. Look, he said,
do you see any bulls in my hand?

He laughed. His hand was very fine and the wrist was small.

There are thousands of bulls, Brett said. She was not at all nervous
now. She looked lovely.

Good, Romero laughed. At a thousand duros apiece, he said to me in
Spanish. Tell me some more.

Its a good hand, Brett said. I think hell live a long time.

Say it to me. Not to your friend.

I said youd live a long time.

I know it, Romero said. Im never going to die.

I tapped with my finger-tips on the table. Romero saw it. He shook his
head.

No. Dont do that. The bulls are my best friends.

I translated to Brett.

You kill your friends? she asked.

Always, he said in English, and laughed. So they dont kill me. He
looked at her across the table.

You know English well.

Yes, he said. Pretty well, sometimes. But I must not let anybody
know. It would be very bad, a torero who speaks English.

Why? asked Brett.

It would be bad. The people would not like it. Not yet.

Why not?

They would not like it. Bull-fighters are not like that.

What are bull-fighters like?

He laughed and tipped his hat down over his eyes and changed the angle
of his cigar and the expression of his face.

Like at the table, he said. I glanced over. He had mimicked exactly
the expression of Nacional. He smiled, his face natural again. No. I
must forget English.

Dont forget it, yet, Brett said.

No?

No.

All right.

He laughed again.

I would like a hat like that, Brett said.

Good. Ill get you one.

Right. See that you do.

I will. Ill get you one to-night.

I stood up. Romero rose, too.

Sit down, I said. I must go and find our friends and bring them
here.

He looked at me. It was a final look to ask if it were understood. It
was understood all right.

Sit down, Brett said to him. You must teach me Spanish.

He sat down and looked at her across the table. I went out. The
hard-eyed people at the bull-fighter table watched me go. It was not
pleasant. When I came back and looked in the caf, twenty minutes later,
Brett and Pedro Romero were gone. The coffee-glasses and our three empty
cognac-glasses were on the table. A waiter came with a cloth and picked
up the glasses and mopped off the table.




                                CHAPTER
                                   17


Outside the Bar Milano I found Bill and Mike and Edna. Edna was the
girls name.

Weve been thrown out, Edna said.

By the police, said Mike. Theres some people in there that dont
like me.

Ive kept them out of four fights, Edna said. Youve got to help me.

Bills face was red.

Come back in, Edna, he said. Go on in there and dance with Mike.

Its silly, Edna said. Therell just be another row.

Damned Biarritz swine, Bill said.

Come on, Mike said. After all, its a pub. They cant occupy a whole
pub.

Good old Mike, Bill said. Damned English swine come here and insult
Mike and try and spoil the fiesta.

Theyre so bloody, Mike said. I hate the English.

They cant insult Mike, Bill said. Mike is a swell fellow. They cant
insult Mike. I wont stand it. Who cares if he is a damn bankrupt? His
voice broke.

Who cares? Mike said. I dont care. Jake doesnt care. Do _you_
care?

No, Edna said. Are you a bankrupt?

Of course I am. You dont care, do you, Bill?

Bill put his arm around Mikes shoulder.

I wish to hell I was a bankrupt. Id show those bastards.

Theyre just English, Mike said. It never makes any difference what
the English say.

The dirty swine, Bill said. Im going to clean them out.

Bill, Edna looked at me. Please dont go in again, Bill. Theyre so
stupid.

Thats it, said Mike. Theyre stupid. I knew that was what it was.

They cant say things like that about Mike, Bill said.

Do you know them? I asked Mike.

No. I never saw them. They say they know me.

I wont stand it, Bill said.

Come on. Lets go over to the Suizo, I said.

Theyre a bunch of Ednas friends from Biarritz, Bill said.

Theyre simply stupid, Edna said.

One of thems Charley Blackman, from Chicago, Bill said.

I was never in Chicago, Mike said.

Edna started to laugh and could not stop.

Take me away from here, she said, you bankrupts.

What kind of a row was it? I asked Edna. We were walking across the
square to the Suizo. Bill was gone.

I dont know what happened, but some one had the police called to keep
Mike out of the back room. There were some people that had known Mike at
Cannes. Whats the matter with Mike?

Probably he owes them money I said. Thats what people usually get
bitter about.

In front of the ticket-booths out in the square there were two lines of
people waiting. They were sitting on chairs or crouched on the ground
with blankets and newspapers around them. They were waiting for the
wickets to open in the morning to buy tickets for the bull-fight. The
night was clearing and the moon was out. Some of the people in the line
were sleeping.

At the Caf Suizo we had just sat down and ordered Fundador when Robert
Cohn came up.

Wheres Brett? he asked.

I dont know.

She was with you.

She must have gone to bed.

Shes not.

I dont know where she is.

His face was sallow under the light. He was standing up.

Tell me where she is.

Sit down, I said. I dont know where she is.

The hell you dont!

You can shut your face.

Tell me where Brett is.

Ill not tell you a damn thing.

You know where she is.

If I did I wouldnt tell you.

Oh, go to hell, Cohn, Mike called from the table. Bretts gone off
with the bull-fighter chap. Theyre on their honeymoon.

You shut up.

Oh, go to hell! Mike said languidly.

Is that where she is? Cohn turned to me.

Go to hell!

She was with you. Is that where she is?

Go to hell!

Ill make you tell mehe stepped forwardyou damned pimp.

I swung at him and he ducked. I saw his face duck sideways in the light.
He hit me and I sat down on the pavement. As I started to get on my feet
he hit me twice. I went down backward under a table. I tried to get up
and felt I did not have any legs. I felt I must get on my feet and try
and hit him. Mike helped me up. Some one poured a carafe of water on my
head. Mike had an arm around me, and I found I was sitting on a chair.
Mike was pulling at my ears.

I say, you were cold, Mike said.

Where the hell were you?

Oh, I was around.

You didnt want to mix in it?

He knocked Mike down, too, Edna said.

He didnt knock me out, Mike said. I just lay there.

Does this happen every night at your fiestas? Edna asked. Wasnt that
Mr. Cohn?

Im all right, I said. My heads a little wobbly.

There were several waiters and a crowd of people standing around.

Vaya! said Mike. Get away. Go on.

The waiters moved the people away.

It was quite a thing to watch, Edna said. He must be a boxer.

He is.

I wish Bill had been here, Edna said. Id like to have seen Bill
knocked down, too. Ive always wanted to see Bill knocked down. Hes so
big.

I was hoping he would knock down a waiter, Mike said, and get
arrested. Id like to see Mr. Robert Cohn in jail.

No, I said.

Oh, no, said Edna. You dont mean that.

I do, though, Mike said. Im not one of these chaps likes being
knocked about. I never play games, even.

Mike took a drink.

I never liked to hunt, you know. There was always the danger of having
a horse fall on you. How do you feel, Jake?

All right.

Youre nice, Edna said to Mike. Are you really a bankrupt?

Im a tremendous bankrupt, Mike said. I owe money to everybody. Dont
you owe any money?

Tons.

I owe everybody money, Mike said. I borrowed a hundred pesetas from
Montoya to-night.

The hell you did, I said.

Ill pay it back, Mike said. I always pay everything back.

Thats why youre a bankrupt, isnt it? Edna said.

I stood up. I had heard them talking from a long way away. It all seemed
like some bad play.

Im going over to the hotel, I said. Then I heard them talking about
me.

Is he all right? Edna asked.

Wed better walk with him.

Im all right, I said. Dont come. Ill see you all later.

I walked away from the caf. They were sitting at the table. I looked
back at them and at the empty tables. There was a waiter sitting at one
of the tables with his head in his hands.

Walking across the square to the hotel everything looked new and
changed. I had never seen the trees before. I had never seen the
flagpoles before, nor the front of the theatre. It was all different. I
felt as I felt once coming home from an out-of-town football game. I was
carrying a suitcase with my football things in it, and I walked up the
street from the station in the town I had lived in all my life and it
was all new. They were raking the lawns and burning leaves in the road,
and I stopped for a long time and watched. It was all strange. Then I
went on, and my feet seemed to be a long way off, and everything seemed
to come from a long way off, and I could hear my feet walking a great
distance away. I had been kicked in the head early in the game. It was
like that crossing the square. It was like that going up the stairs in
the hotel. Going up the stairs took a long time, and I had the feeling
that I was carrying my suitcase. There was a light in the room. Bill
came out and met me in the hall.

Say, he said, go up and see Cohn. Hes been in a jam, and hes asking
for you.

The hell with him.

Go on. Go on up and see him.

I did not want to climb another flight of stairs.

What are you looking at me that way for?

Im not looking at you. Go on up and see Cohn. Hes in bad shape.

You were drunk a little while ago, I said.

Im drunk now, Bill said. But you go up and see Cohn. He wants to see
you.

All right, I said. It was just a matter of climbing more stairs. I
went on up the stairs carrying my phantom suitcase. I walked down the
hall to Cohns room. The door was shut and I knocked.

Who is it?

Barnes.

Come in, Jake.

I opened the door and went in, and set down my suitcase. There was no
light in the room. Cohn was lying, face down, on the bed in the dark.

Hello, Jake.

Dont call me Jake.

I stood by the door. It was just like this that I had come home. Now it
was a hot bath that I needed. A deep, hot bath, to lie back in.

Wheres the bathroom? I asked.

Cohn was crying. There he was, face down on the bed, crying. He had on a
white polo shirt, the kind hed worn at Princeton.

Im sorry, Jake. Please forgive me.

Forgive you, hell.

Please forgive me, Jake.

I did not say anything. I stood there by the door.

I was crazy. You must see how it was.

Oh, thats all right.

I couldnt stand it about Brett.

You called me a pimp.

I did not care. I wanted a hot bath. I wanted a hot bath in deep water.

I know. Please dont remember it. I was crazy.

Thats all right.

He was crying. His voice was funny. He lay there in his white shirt on
the bed in the dark. His polo shirt.

Im going away in the morning.

He was crying without making any noise.

I just couldnt stand it about Brett. Ive been through hell, Jake.
Its been simply hell. When I met her down here Brett treated me as
though I were a perfect stranger. I just couldnt stand it. We lived
together at San Sebastian. I suppose you know it. I cant stand it any
more.

He lay there on the bed.

Well, I said, Im going to take a bath.

You were the only friend I had, and I loved Brett so.

Well, I said, so long.

I guess it isnt any use, he said. I guess it isnt any damn use.

What?

Everything. Please say you forgive me, Jake.

Sure, I said. Its all right.

I felt so terribly. Ive been through such hell, Jake. Now everythings
gone. Everything.

Well, I said, so long. Ive got to go.

He rolled over, sat on the edge of the bed, and then stood up.

So long, Jake, he said. Youll shake hands, wont you?

Sure. Why not?

We shook hands. In the dark I could not see his face very well.

Well, I said, see you in the morning.

Im going away in the morning.

Oh, yes, I said.

I went out. Cohn was standing in the door of the room.

Are you all right, Jake? he asked.

Oh, yes, I said. Im all right.

I could not find the bathroom. After a while I found it. There was a
deep stone tub. I turned on the taps and the water would not run. I sat
down on the edge of the bath-tub. When I got up to go I found I had
taken off my shoes. I hunted for them and found them and carried them
down-stairs. I found my room and went inside and undressed and got into
bed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I woke with a headache and the noise of the bands going by in the
street. I remembered I had promised to take Bills friend Edna to see
the bulls go through the street and into the ring. I dressed and went
down-stairs and out into the cold early morning. People were crossing
the square, hurrying toward the bull-ring. Across the square were the
two lines of men in front of the ticket-booths. They were still waiting
for the tickets to go on sale at seven oclock. I hurried across the
street to the caf. The waiter told me that my friends had been there
and gone.

How many were they?

Two gentlemen and a lady.

That was all right. Bill and Mike were with Edna. She had been afraid
last night they would pass out. That was why I was to be sure to take
her. I drank the coffee and hurried with the other people toward the
bull-ring. I was not groggy now. There was only a bad headache.
Everything looked sharp and clear, and the town smelt of the early
morning.

The stretch of ground from the edge of the town to the bull-ring was
muddy. There was a crowd all along the fence that led to the ring, and
the outside balconies and the top of the bull-ring were solid with
people. I heard the rocket and I knew I could not get into the ring in
time to see the bulls come in, so I shoved through the crowd to the
fence. I was pushed close against the planks of the fence. Between the
two fences of the runway the police were clearing the crowd along. They
walked or trotted on into the bull-ring. Then people commenced to come
running. A drunk slipped and fell. Two policemen grabbed him and rushed
him over to the fence. The crowd were running fast now. There was a
great shout from the crowd, and putting my head through between the
boards I saw the bulls just coming out of the street into the long
running pen. They were going fast and gaining on the crowd. Just then
another drunk started out from the fence with a blouse in his hands. He
wanted to do capework with the bulls. The two policemen tore out,
collared him, one hit him with a club, and they dragged him against the
fence and stood flattened out against the fence as the last of the crowd
and the bulls went by. There were so many people running ahead of the
bulls that the mass thickened and slowed up going through the gate into
the ring, and as the bulls passed, galloping together, heavy,
muddy-sided, horns swinging, one shot ahead, caught a man in the running
crowd in the back and lifted him in the air. Both the mans arms were by
his sides, his head went back as the horn went in, and the bull lifted
him and then dropped him. The bull picked another man running in front,
but the man disappeared into the crowd, and the crowd was through the
gate and into the ring with the bulls behind them. The red door of the
ring went shut, the crowd on the outside balconies of the bull-ring were
pressing through to the inside, there was a shout, then another shout.

The man who had been gored lay face down in the trampled mud. People
climbed over the fence, and I could not see the man because the crowd
was so thick around him. From inside the ring came the shouts. Each
shout meant a charge by some bull into the crowd. You could tell by the
degree of intensity in the shout how bad a thing it was that was
happening. Then the rocket went up that meant the steers had gotten the
bulls out of the ring and into the corrals. I left the fence and started
back toward the town.

Back in the town I went to the caf to have a second coffee and some
buttered toast. The waiters were sweeping out the caf and mopping off
the tables. One came over and took my order.

Anything happen at the encierro?

I didnt see it all. One man was badly cogido.

Where?

Here. I put one hand on the small of my back and the other on my
chest, where it looked as though the horn must have come through. The
waiter nodded his head and swept the crumbs from the table with his
cloth.

Badly cogido, he said. All for sport. All for pleasure.

He went away and came back with the long-handled coffee and milk pots.
He poured the milk and coffee. It came out of the long spouts in two
streams into the big cup. The waiter nodded his head.

Badly cogido through the back, he said. He put the pots down on the
table and sat down in the chair at the table. A big horn wound. All for
fun. Just for fun. What do you think of that?

I dont know.

Thats it. All for fun. Fun, you understand.

Youre not an aficionado?

Me? What are bulls? Animals. Brute animals. He stood up and put his
hand on the small of his back. Right through the back. A cornada right
through the back. For funyou understand.

He shook his head and walked away, carrying the coffee-pots. Two men
were going by in the street. The waiter shouted to them. They were
grave-looking. One shook his head. Muerto! he called.

The waiter nodded his head. The two men went on. They were on some
errand. The waiter came over to my table.

You hear? Muerto. Dead. Hes dead. With a horn through him. All for
morning fun. Es muy flamenco.

Its bad.

Not for me, the waiter said. No fun in that for me.

Later in the day we learned that the man who was killed was named
Vicente Girones, and came from near Tafalla. The next day in the paper
we read that he was twenty-eight years old, and had a farm, a wife, and
two children. He had continued to come to the fiesta each year after he
was married. The next day his wife came in from Tafalla to be with the
body, and the day after there was a service in the chapel of San Fermin,
and the coffin was carried to the railway-station by members of the
dancing and drinking society of Tafalla. The drums marched ahead, and
there was music on the fifes, and behind the men who carried the coffin
walked the wife and two children. . . . Behind them marched all the
members of the dancing and drinking societies of Pamplona, Estella,
Tafalla, and Sanguesa who could stay over for the funeral. The coffin
was loaded into the baggage-car of the train, and the widow and the two
children rode, sitting, all three together, in an open third-class
railway-carriage. The train started with a jerk, and then ran smoothly,
going down grade around the edge of the plateau and out into the fields
of grain that blew in the wind on the plain on the way to Tafalla.

The bull who killed Vicente Girones was named Bocanegra, was Number 118
of the bull-breeding establishment of Sanchez Tabemo, and was killed by
Pedro Romero as the third bull of that same afternoon. His ear was cut
by popular acclamation and given to Pedro Romero, who, in turn, gave it
to Brett, who wrapped it in a handkerchief belonging to myself, and left
both ear and handkerchief, along with a number of Muratti
cigarette-stubs, shoved far back in the drawer of the bed-table that
stood beside her bed in the Hotel Montoya, in Pamplona.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Back in the hotel, the night watchman was sitting on a bench inside the
door. He had been there all night and was very sleepy. He stood up as I
came in. Three of the waitresses came in at the same time. They had been
to the morning show at the bull-ring. They went up-stairs laughing. I
followed them up-stairs and went into my room. I took off my shoes and
lay down on the bed. The window was open onto the balcony and the
sunlight was bright in the room. I did not feel sleepy. It must have
been half past three oclock when I had gone to bed and the bands had
waked me at six. My jaw was sore on both sides. I felt it with my thumb
and fingers. That damn Cohn. He should have hit somebody the first time
he was insulted, and then gone away. He was so sure that Brett loved
him. He was going to stay, and true love would conquer all. Some one
knocked on the door.

Come in.

It was Bill and Mike. They sat down on the bed.

Some encierro, Bill said. Some encierro.

I say, werent you there? Mike asked. Ring for some beer, Bill.

What a morning! Bill said. He mopped off his face. My God! what a
morning! And heres old Jake. Old Jake, the human punching-bag.

What happened inside?

Good God! Bill said, what happened, Mike?

There were these bulls coming in, Mike said. Just ahead of them was
the crowd, and some chap tripped and brought the whole lot of them
down.

And the bulls all came in right over them, Bill said.

I heard them yell.

That was Edna, Bill said.

Chaps kept coming out and waving their shirts.

One bull went along the barrera and hooked everybody over.

They took about twenty chaps to the infirmary, Mike said.

What a morning! Bill said. The damn police kept arresting chaps that
wanted to go and commit suicide with the bulls.

The steers took them in, in the end, Mike said.

It took about an hour.

It was really about a quarter of an hour, Mike objected.

Oh, go to hell, Bill said. Youve been in the war. It was two hours
and a half for me.

Wheres that beer? Mike asked.

What did you do with the lovely Edna?

We took her home just now. Shes gone to bed.

How did she like it?

Fine. We told her it was just like that every morning.

She was impressed, Mike said.

She wanted us to go down in the ring, too, Bill said. She likes
action.

I said it wouldnt be fair to my creditors, Mike said.

What a morning, Bill said. And what a night!

Hows your jaw, Jake? Mike asked.

Sore, I said.

Bill laughed.

Why didnt you hit him with a chair?

You can talk, Mike said. Hed have knocked you out, too. I never saw
him hit me. I rather think I saw him just before, and then quite
suddenly I was sitting down in the street, and Jake was lying under a
table.

Where did he go afterward? I asked.

Here she is, Mike said. Heres the beautiful lady with the beer.

The chambermaid put the tray with the beer-bottles and glasses down on
the table.

Now bring up three more bottles, Mike said.

Where did Cohn go after he hit me? I asked Bill.

Dont you know about that? Mike was opening a beer-bottle. He poured
the beer into one of the glasses, holding the glass close to the bottle.

Really? Bill asked.

Why he went in and found Brett and the bull-fighter chap in the
bull-fighters room, and then he massacred the poor, bloody
bull-fighter.

No.

Yes.

What a night! Bill said.

He nearly killed the poor, bloody bull-fighter. Then Cohn wanted to
take Brett away. Wanted to make an honest woman of her, I imagine.
Damned touching scene.

He took a long drink of the beer.

He is an ass.

What happened?

Brett gave him what for. She told him off. I think she was rather
good.

Ill bet she was, Bill said.

Then Cohn broke down and cried, and wanted to shake hands with the
bull-fighter fellow. He wanted to shake hands with Brett, too.

I know. He shook hands with me.

Did he? Well, they werent having any of it. The bull-fighter fellow
was rather good. He didnt say much, but he kept getting up and getting
knocked down again. Cohn couldnt knock him out. It must have been
damned funny.

Where did you hear all this?

Brett. I saw her this morning.

What happened finally?

It seems the bull-fighter fellow was sitting on the bed. Hed been
knocked down about fifteen times, and he wanted to fight some more.
Brett held him and wouldnt let him get up. He was weak, but Brett
couldnt hold him, and he got up. Then Cohn said he wouldnt hit him
again. Said he couldnt do it. Said it would be wicked. So the
bull-fighter chap sort of rather staggered over to him. Cohn went back
against the wall.

So you wont hit me?

No, said Cohn. Id be ashamed to.

So the bull-fighter fellow hit him just as hard as he could in the
face, and then sat down on the floor. He couldnt get up, Brett said.
Cohn wanted to pick him up and carry him to the bed. He said if Cohn
helped him hed kill him, and hed kill him anyway this morning if Cohn
wasnt out of town. Cohn was crying, and Brett had told him off, and he
wanted to shake hands. Ive told you that before.

Tell the rest, Bill said.

It seems the bull-fighter chap was sitting on the floor. He was waiting
to get strength enough to get up and hit Cohn again. Brett wasnt having
any shaking hands, and Cohn was crying and telling her how much he loved
her, and she was telling him not to be a ruddy ass. Then Cohn leaned
down to shake hands with the bull-fighter fellow. No hard feelings, you
know. All for forgiveness. And the bull-fighter chap hit him in the face
again.

Thats quite a kid, Bill said.

He ruined Cohn, Mike said. You know I dont think Cohn will ever want
to knock people about again.

When did you see Brett?

This morning. She came in to get some things. Shes looking after this
Romero lad.

He poured out another bottle of beer.

Bretts rather cut up. But she loves looking after people. Thats how
we came to go off together. She was looking after me.

I know, I said.

Im rather drunk, Mike said. I think Ill _stay_ rather drunk. This
is all awfully amusing, but its not too pleasant. Its not too pleasant
for me.

He drank off the beer.

I gave Brett what for, you know. I said if she would go about with Jews
and bull-fighters and such people, she must expect trouble. He leaned
forward. I say, Jake, do you mind if I drink that bottle of yours?
Shell bring you another one.

Please, I said. I wasnt drinking it, anyway.

Mike started to open the bottle. Would you mind opening it? I pressed
up the wire fastener and poured it for him.

You know, Mike went on, Brett was rather good. Shes always rather
good. I gave her a fearful hiding about Jews and bull-fighters, and all
those sort of people, and do you know what she said: Yes. Ive had such
a hell of a happy life with the British aristocracy!

He took a drink.

That was rather good. Ashley, chap she got the title from, was a
sailor, you know. Ninth baronet. When he came home he wouldnt sleep in
a bed. Always made Brett sleep on the floor. Finally, when he got really
bad, he used to tell her hed kill her. Always slept with a loaded
service revolver. Brett used to take the shells out when hed gone to
sleep. She hasnt had an absolutely happy life. Brett. Damned shame,
too. She enjoys things so.

He stood up. His hand was shaky.

Im going in the room. Try and get a little sleep.

He smiled.

We go too long without sleep in these fiestas. Im going to start now
and get plenty of sleep. Damn bad thing not to get sleep. Makes you
frightfully nervy.

Well see you at noon at the Irua, Bill said.

Mike went out the door. We heard him in the next room.

He rang the bell and the chambermaid came and knocked at the door.

Bring up half a dozen bottles of beer and a bottle of Fundador, Mike
told her.

Si, Seorito.

Im going to bed, Bill said. Poor old Mike. I had a hell of a row
about him last night.

Where? At that Milano place?

Yes. There was a fellow there that had helped pay Brett and Mike out of
Cannes, once. He was damned nasty.

I know the story.

I didnt. Nobody ought to have a right to say things about Mike.

Thats what makes it bad.

They oughtnt to have any right. I wish to hell they didnt have any
right. Im going to bed.

Was anybody killed in the ring?

I dont think so. Just badly hurt.

A man was killed outside in the runway.

Was there? said Bill.




                                CHAPTER
                                   18


At noon we were all at the caf. It was crowded. We were eating shrimps
and drinking beer. The town was crowded. Every street was full. Big
motor-cars from Biarritz and San Sebastian kept driving up and parking
around the square. They brought people for the bull-fight. Sight-seeing
cars came up, too. There was one with twenty-five Englishwomen in it.
They sat in the big, white car and looked through their glasses at the
fiesta. The dancers were all quite drunk. It was the last day of the
fiesta.

The fiesta was solid and unbroken, but the motor-cars and tourist-cars
made little islands of onlookers. When the cars emptied, the onlookers
were absorbed into the crowd. You did not see them again except as sport
clothes, odd-looking at a table among the closely packed peasants in
black smocks. The fiesta absorbed even the Biarritz English so that you
did not see them unless you passed close to a table. All the time there
was music in the street. The drums kept on pounding and the pipes were
going. Inside the cafs men with their hands gripping the table, or on
each others shoulders, were singing the hard-voiced singing.

Here comes Brett, Bill said.

I looked and saw her coming through the crowd in the square, walking,
her head up, as though the fiesta were being staged in her honor, and
she found it pleasant and amusing.

Hello, you chaps! she said. I say, I _have_ a thirst.

Get another big beer, Bill said to the waiter.

Shrimps?

Is Cohn gone? Brett asked.

Yes, Bill said. He hired a car.

The beer came. Brett started to lift the glass mug and her hand shook.
She saw it and smiled, and leaned forward and took a long sip.

Good beer.

Very good, I said. I was nervous about Mike. I did not think he had
slept. He must have been drinking all the time, but he seemed to be
under control.

I heard Cohn had hurt you, Jake, Brett said.

No. Knocked me out. That was all.

I say, he did hurt Pedro Romero, Brett said. He hurt him most badly.

How is he?

Hell be all right. He wont go out of the room.

Does he look badly?

Very. He was really hurt. I told him I wanted to pop out and see you
chaps for a minute.

Is he going to fight?

Rather. Im going with you, if you dont mind.

Hows your boy friend? Mike asked. He had not listened to anything
that Brett had said.

Bretts got a bull-fighter, he said. She had a Jew named Cohn, but he
turned out badly.

Brett stood up.

I am not going to listen to that sort of rot from you, Michael.

Hows your boy friend?

Damned well, Brett said. Watch him this afternoon.

Bretts got a bull-fighter, Mike said. A beautiful, bloody
bull-fighter.

Would you mind walking over with me? I want to talk to you, Jake.

Tell him all about your bull-fighter, Mike said. Oh, to hell with
your bull-fighter! He tipped the table so that all the beers and the
dish of shrimps went over in a crash.

Come on, Brett said. Lets get out of this.

In the crowd crossing the square I said: How is it?

Im not going to see him after lunch until the fight. His people come
in and dress him. Theyre very angry about me, he says.

Brett was radiant. She was happy. The sun was out and the day was
bright.

I feel altogether changed, Brett said. Youve no idea, Jake.

Anything you want me to do?

No, just go to the fight with me.

Well see you at lunch?

No. Im eating with him.

We were standing under the arcade at the door of the hotel. They were
carrying tables out and setting them up under the arcade.

Want to take a turn out to the park? Brett asked. I dont want to go
up yet. I fancy hes sleeping.

We walked along past the theatre and out of the square and along through
the barracks of the fair, moving with the crowd between the lines of
booths. We came out on a cross-street that led to the Paseo de Sarasate.
We could see the crowd walking there, all the fashionably dressed
people. They were making the turn at the upper end of the park.

Dont lets go there, Brett said. I dont want staring at just now.

We stood in the sunlight. It was hot and good after the rain and the
clouds from the sea.

I hope the wind goes down, Brett said. Its very bad for him.

So do I.

He says the bulls are all right.

Theyre good.

Is that San Fermins?

Brett looked at the yellow wall of the chapel.

Yes. Where the show started on Sunday.

Lets go in. Do you mind? Id rather like to pray a little for him or
something.

We went in through the heavy leather door that moved very lightly. It
was dark inside. Many people were praying. You saw them as your eyes
adjusted themselves to the half-light. We knelt at one of the long
wooden benches. After a little I felt Brett stiffen beside me, and saw
she was looking straight ahead.

Come on, she whispered throatily. Lets get out of here. Makes me
damned nervous.

Outside in the hot brightness of the street Brett looked up at the
tree-tops in the wind. The praying had not been much of a success.

Dont know why I get so nervy in church, Brett said. Never does me
any good.

We walked along.

Im damned bad for a religious atmosphere, Brett said. Ive the wrong
type of face.

You know, Brett said, Im not worried about him at all. I just feel
happy about him.

Good.

I wish the wind would drop, though.

Its liable to go down by five oclock.

Lets hope.

You might pray, I laughed.

Never does me any good. Ive never gotten anything I prayed for. Have
you?

Oh, yes.

Oh, rot, said Brett. Maybe it works for some people, though. You
dont look very religious, Jake.

Im pretty religious.

Oh, rot, said Brett. Dont start proselyting to-day. To-days going
to be bad enough as it is.

It was the first time I had seen her in the old happy, careless way
since before she went off with Cohn. We were back again in front of the
hotel. All the tables were set now, and already several were filled with
people eating.

Do look after Mike, Brett said. Dont let him get too bad.

Your frients haff gone up-stairs, the German matre dhtel said in
English. He was a continual eavesdropper. Brett turned to him:

Thank you, so much. Have you anything else to say?

No, _maam_.

Good, said Brett.

Save us a table for three, I said to the German. He smiled his dirty
little pink-and-white smile.

Iss madam eating here?

No, Brett said.

Den I think a tabul for two will be enuff.

Dont talk to him, Brett said. Mike must have been in bad shape, she
said on the stairs. We passed Montoya on the stairs. He bowed and did
not smile.

Ill see you at the caf, Brett said. Thank you, so much, Jake.

We had stopped at the floor our rooms were on. She went straight down
the hall and into Romeros room. She did not knock. She simply opened
the door, went in, and closed it behind her.

I stood in front of the door of Mikes room and knocked. There was no
answer. I tried the knob and it opened. Inside the room was in great
disorder. All the bags were opened and clothing was strewn around. There
were empty bottles beside the bed. Mike lay on the bed looking like a
death mask of himself. He opened his eyes and looked at me.

Hello, Jake, he said very slowly. Im getting a lit tle sleep. Ive
want ed a lit tle sleep for a long time.

Let me cover you over.

No. Im quite warm.

Dont go. I have nt got ten to sleep yet.

Youll sleep, Mike. Dont worry, boy.

Bretts got a bull-fighter, Mike said. But her Jew has gone away.

He turned his head and looked at me.

Damned good thing, what?

Yes. Now go to sleep, Mike. You ought to get some sleep.

Im just start ing. Im go ing to get a lit tle sleep.

He shut his eyes. I went out of the room and turned the door to quietly.
Bill was in my room reading the paper.

See Mike?

Yes.

Lets go and eat.

I wont eat down-stairs with that German head waiter. He was damned
snotty when I was getting Mike up-stairs.

He was snotty to us, too.

Lets go out and eat in the town.

We went down the stairs. On the stairs we passed a girl coming up with a
covered tray.

There goes Bretts lunch, Bill said.

And the kids, I said.

Outside on the terrace under the arcade the German head waiter came up.
His red cheeks were shiny. He was being polite.

I haff a tabul for two for you gentlemen, he said.

Go sit at it, Bill said. We went on out across the street.

We ate at a restaurant in a side street off the square. They were all
men eating in the restaurant. It was full of smoke and drinking and
singing. The food was good and so was the wine. We did not talk much.
Afterward we went to the caf and watched the fiesta come to the
boiling-point. Brett came over soon after lunch. She said she had looked
in the room and that Mike was asleep.

When the fiesta boiled over and toward the bull-ring we went with the
crowd. Brett sat at the ringside between Bill and me. Directly below us
was the callejon, the passageway between the stands and the red fence of
the barrera. Behind us the concrete stands filled solidly. Out in front,
beyond the red fence, the sand of the ring was smooth-rolled and yellow.
It looked a little heavy from the rain, but it was dry in the sun and
firm and smooth. The sword-handlers and bull-ring servants came down the
callejon carrying on their shoulders the wicker baskets of fighting
capes and muletas. They were bloodstained and compactly folded and
packed in the baskets. The sword-handlers opened the heavy leather
sword-cases so the red wrapped hilts of the sheaf of swords showed as
the leather case leaned against the fence. They unfolded the
dark-stained red flannel of the muletas and fixed batons in them to
spread the stuff and give the matador something to hold. Brett watched
it all. She was absorbed in the professional details.

Hes his name stencilled on all the capes and muletas, she said. Why
do they call them muletas?

I dont know.

I wonder if they ever launder them.

I dont think so. It might spoil the color.

The blood must stiffen them, Bill said.

Funny, Brett said. How one doesnt mind the blood.

Below in the narrow passage of the callejon the sword-handlers arranged
everything. All the seats were full. Above, all the boxes were full.
There was not an empty seat except in the Presidents box. When he came
in the fight would start. Across the smooth sand, in the high doorway
that led into the corrals, the bull-fighters were standing, their arms
furled in their capes, talking, waiting for the signal to march in
across the arena. Brett was watching them with the glasses.

Here, would you like to look?

I looked through the glasses and saw the three matadors. Romero was in
the centre, Belmonte on his left, Marcial on his right. Back of them
were their people, and behind the banderilleros, back in the passageway
and in the open space of the corral, I saw the picadors. Romero was
wearing a black suit. His tricornered hat was low down over his eyes. I
could not see his face clearly under the hat, but it looked badly
marked. He was looking straight ahead. Marcial was smoking a cigarette
guardedly, holding it in his hand. Belmonte looked ahead, his face wan
and yellow, his long wolf jaw out. He was looking at nothing. Neither he
nor Romero seemed to have anything in common with the others. They were
all alone. The President came in; there was handclapping above us in the
grand stand, and I handed the glasses to Brett. There was applause. The
music started. Brett looked through the glasses.

Here, take them, she said.

Through the glasses I saw Belmonte speak to Romero. Marcial straightened
up and dropped his cigarette, and, looking straight ahead, their heads
back, their free arms swinging, the three matadors walked out. Behind
them came all the procession, opening out, all striding in step, all the
capes furled, everybody with free arms swinging, and behind rode the
picadors, their pics rising like lances. Behind all came the two trains
of mules and the bull-ring servants. The matadors bowed, holding their
hats on, before the Presidents box, and then came over to the barrera
below us. Pedro Romero took off his heavy gold-brocaded cape and handed
it over the fence to his sword-handler. He said something to the
sword-handler. Close below us we saw Romeros lips were puffed, both
eyes were discolored. His face was discolored and swollen. The
sword-handler took the cape, looked up at Brett, and came over to us and
handed up the cape.

Spread it out in front of you, I said.

Brett leaned forward. The cape was heavy and smoothly stiff with gold.
The sword-handler looked back, shook his head, and said something. A man
beside me leaned over toward Brett.

He doesnt want you to spread it, he said. You should fold it and
keep it in your lap.

Brett folded the heavy cape.

Romero did not look up at us. He was speaking to Belmonte. Belmonte had
sent his formal cape over to some friends. He looked across at them and
smiled, his wolf smile that was only with the mouth. Romero leaned over
the barrera and asked for the water-jug. The sword-handler brought it
and Romero poured water over the percale of his fighting-cape, and then
scuffed the lower folds in the sand with his slippered foot.

Whats that for? Brett asked.

To give it weight in the wind.

His face looks bad, Bill said.

He feels very badly, Brett said. He should be in bed.

The first bull was Belmontes. Belmonte was very good. But because he
got thirty thousand pesetas and people had stayed in line all night to
buy tickets to see him, the crowd demanded that he should be more than
very good. Belmontes great attraction is working close to the bull. In
bull-fighting they speak of the terrain of the bull and the terrain of
the bull-fighter. As long as a bull-fighter stays in his own terrain he
is comparatively safe. Each time he enters into the terrain of the bull
he is in great danger. Belmonte, in his best days, worked always in the
terrain of the bull. This way he gave the sensation of coming tragedy.
People went to the corrida to see Belmonte, to be given tragic
sensations, and perhaps to see the death of Belmonte. Fifteen years ago
they said if you wanted to see Belmonte you should go quickly, while he
was still alive. Since then he has killed more than a thousand bulls.
When he retired the legend grew up about how his bull-fighting had been,
and when he came out of retirement the public were disappointed because
no real man could work as close to the bulls as Belmonte was supposed to
have done, not, of course, even Belmonte.

Also Belmonte imposed conditions and insisted that his bulls should not
be too large, nor too dangerously armed with horns, and so the element
that was necessary to give the sensation of tragedy was not there, and
the public, who wanted three times as much from Belmonte, who was sick
with a fistula, as Belmonte had ever been able to give, felt defrauded
and cheated, and Belmontes jaw came further out in contempt, and his
face turned yellower, and he moved with greater difficulty as his pain
increased, and finally the crowd were actively against him, and he was
utterly contemptuous and indifferent. He had meant to have a great
afternoon, and instead it was an afternoon of sneers, shouted insults,
and finally a volley of cushions and pieces of bread and vegetables,
thrown down at him in the plaza where he had had his greatest triumphs.
His jaw only went further out. Sometimes he turned to smile that
toothed, long-jawed, lipless smile when he was called something
particularly insulting, and always the pain that any movement produced
grew stronger and stronger, until finally his yellow face was parchment
color, and after his second bull was dead and the throwing of bread and
cushions was over, after he had saluted the President with the same
wolf-jawed smile and contemptuous eyes, and handed his sword over the
barrera to be wiped, and put back in its case, he passed through into
the callejon and leaned on the barrera below us, his head on his arms,
not seeing, not hearing anything, only going through his pain. When he
looked up, finally, he asked for a drink of water. He swallowed a
little, rinsed his mouth, spat the water, took his cape, and went back
into the ring.

Because they were against Belmonte the public were for Romero. From the
moment he left the barrera and went toward the bull they applauded him.
Belmonte watched Romero, too, watched him always without seeming to. He
paid no attention to Marcial. Marcial was the sort of thing he knew all
about. He had come out of retirement to compete with Marcial, knowing it
was a competition gained in advance. He had expected to compete with
Marcial and the other stars of the decadence of bull-fighting, and he
knew that the sincerity of his own bull-fighting would be so set off by
the false sthetics of the bull-fighters of the decadent period that he
would only have to be in the ring. His return from retirement had been
spoiled by Romero. Romero did always, smoothly, calmly, and beautifully,
what he, Belmonte, could only bring himself to do now sometimes. The
crowd felt it, even the people from Biarritz, even the American
ambassador saw it, finally. It was a competition that Belmonte would not
enter because it would lead only to a bad horn wound or death. Belmonte
was no longer well enough. He no longer had his greatest moments in the
bull-ring. He was not sure that there were any great moments. Things
were not the same and now life only came in flashes. He had flashes of
the old greatness with his bulls, but they were not of value because he
had discounted them in advance when he had picked the bulls out for
their safety, getting out of a motor and leaning on a fence, looking
over at the herd on the ranch of his friend the bull-breeder. So he had
two small, manageable bulls without much horns, and when he felt the
greatness again coming, just a little of it through the pain that was
always with him, it had been discounted and sold in advance, and it did
not give him a good feeling. It was the greatness, but it did not make
bull-fighting wonderful to him any more.

Pedro Romero had the greatness. He loved bull-fighting, and I think he
loved the bulls, and I think he loved Brett. Everything of which he
could control the locality he did in front of her all that afternoon.
Never once did he look up. He made it stronger that way, and did it for
himself, too, as well as for her. Because he did not look up to ask if
it pleased he did it all for himself inside, and it strengthened him,
and yet he did it for her, too. But he did not do it for her at any loss
to himself. He gained by it all through the afternoon.

His first quite was directly below us. The three matadors take the
bull in turn after each charge he makes at a picador. Belmonte was the
first. Marcial was the second. Then came Romero. The three of them were
standing at the left of the horse. The picador, his hat down over his
eyes, the shaft of his pic angling sharply toward the bull, kicked in
the spurs and held them and with the reins in his left hand walked the
horse forward toward the bull. The bull was watching. Seemingly he
watched the white horse, but really he watched the triangular steel
point of the pic. Romero, watching, saw the bull start to turn his head.
He did not want to charge. Romero flicked his cape so the color caught
the bulls eye. The bull charged with the reflex, charged, and found not
the flash of color but a white horse, and a man leaned far over the
horse, shot the steel point of the long hickory shaft into the hump of
muscle on the bulls shoulder, and pulled his horse sideways as he
pivoted on the pic, making a wound, enforcing the iron into the bulls
shoulder, making him bleed for Belmonte.

The bull did not insist under the iron. He did not really want to get at
the horse. He turned and the group broke apart and Romero was taking him
out with his cape. He took him out softly and smoothly, and then stopped
and, standing squarely in front of the bull, offered him the cape. The
bulls tail went up and he charged, and Romero moved his arms ahead of
the bull, wheeling, his feet firmed. The dampened, mud-weighted cape
swung open and full as a sail fills, and Romero pivoted with it just
ahead of the bull. At the end of the pass they were facing each other
again. Romero smiled. The bull wanted it again, and Romeros cape filled
again, this time on the other side. Each time he let the bull pass so
close that the man and the bull and the cape that filled and pivoted
ahead of the bull were all one sharply etched mass. It was all so slow
and so controlled. It was as though he were rocking the bull to sleep.
He made four veronicas like that, and finished with a half-veronica that
turned his back on the bull and came away toward the applause, his hand
on his hip, his cape on his arm, and the bull watching his back going
away.

In his own bulls he was perfect. His first bull did not see well. After
the first two passes with the cape Romero knew exactly how bad the
vision was impaired. He worked accordingly. It was not brilliant
bull-fighting. It was only perfect bull-fighting. The crowd wanted the
bull changed. They made a great row. Nothing very fine could happen with
a bull that could not see the lures, but the President would not order
him replaced.

Why dont they change him? Brett asked.

Theyve paid for him. They dont want to lose their money.

Its hardly fair to Romero.

Watch how he handles a bull that cant see the color.

Its the sort of thing I dont like to see.

It was not nice to watch if you cared anything about the person who was
doing it. With the bull who could not see the colors of the capes, or
the scarlet flannel of the muleta, Romero had to make the bull consent
with his body. He had to get so close that the bull saw his body, and
would start for it, and then shift the bulls charge to the flannel and
finish out the pass in the classic manner. The Biarritz crowd did not
like it They thought Romero was afraid, and that was why he gave that
little sidestep each time as he transferred the bulls charge from his
own body to the flannel. They preferred Belmontes imitation of himself
or Marcials imitation of Belmonte. There were three of them in the row
behind us.

Whats he afraid of the bull for? The bulls so dumb he only goes after
the cloth.

Hes just a young bull-fighter. He hasnt learned it yet.

But I thought he was fine with the cape before.

Probably hes nervous now.

Out in the centre of the ring, all alone, Romero was going on with the
same thing, getting so close that the bull could see him plainly,
offering the body, offering it again a little closer, the bull watching
dully, then so close that the bull thought he had him, offering again
and finally drawing the charge and then, just before the horns came,
giving the bull the red cloth to follow with at little, almost
imperceptible, jerk that so offended the critical judgment of the
Biarritz bull-fight experts.

Hes going to kill now, I said to Brett. The bulls still strong. He
wouldnt wear himself out.

Out in the centre of the ring Romero profiled in front of the bull, drew
the sword out from the folds of the muleta, rose on his toes, and
sighted along the blade. The bull charged as Romero charged. Romeros
left hand dropped the muleta over the bulls muzzle to blind him, his
left shoulder went forward between the horns as the sword went in, and
for just an instant he and the bull were one, Romero way out over the
bull, the right arm extended high up to where the hilt of the sword had
gone in between the bulls shoulders. Then the figure was broken. There
was a little jolt as Romero came clear, and then he was standing, one
hand up, facing the bull, his shirt ripped out from under his sleeve,
the white blowing in the wind, and the bull, the red sword hilt tight
between his shoulders, his head going down and his legs settling.

There he goes, Bill said.

Romero was close enough so the bull could see him. His hand still up, he
spoke to the bull. The bull gathered himself, then his head went forward
and he went over slowly, then all over, suddenly, four feet in the air.

They handed the sword to Romero, and carrying it blade down, the muleta
in his other hand, he walked over to in front of the Presidents box,
bowed, straightened, and came over to the barrera and handed over the
sword and muleta.

Bad one, said the sword-handler.

He made me sweat, said Romero. He wiped off his face. The
sword-handler handed him the water-jug. Romero wiped his lips. It hurt
him to drink out of the jug. He did not look up at us.

Marcial had a big day. They were still applauding him when Romeros last
bull came in. It was the bull that had sprinted out and killed the man
in the morning running.

During Romeros first bull his hurt face had been very noticeable.
Everything he did showed it. All the concentration of the awkwardly
delicate working with the bull that could not see well brought it out.
The fight with Cohn had not touched his spirit but his face had been
smashed and his body hurt. He was wiping all that out now. Each thing
that he did with this bull wiped that out a little cleaner. It was a
good bull, a big bull, and with horns, and it turned and recharged
easily and surely. He was what Romero wanted in bulls.

When he had finished his work with the muleta and was ready to kill, the
crowd made him go on. They did not want the bull killed yet, they did
not want it to be over. Romero went on. It was like a course in
bull-fighting. All the passes he linked up, all completed, all slow,
templed and smooth. There were no tricks and no mystifications. There
was no brusqueness. And each pass as it reached the summit gave you a
sudden ache inside. The crowd did not want it ever to be finished.

The bull was squared on all four feet to be killed, and Romero killed
directly below us. He killed not as he had been forced to by the last
bull, but as he wanted to. He profiled directly in front of the bull,
drew the sword out of the folds of the muleta and sighted along the
blade. The bull watched him. Romero spoke to the bull and tapped one of
his feet. The bull charged and Romero waited for the charge, the muleta
held low, sighting along the blade, his feet firm. Then without taking a
step forward, he became one with the bull, the sword was in high between
the shoulders, the bull had followed the low-swung flannel, that
disappeared as Romero lurched clear to the left, and it was over. The
bull tried to go forward, his legs commenced to settle, he swung from
side to side, hesitated, then went down on his knees, and Romeros older
brother leaned forward behind him and drove a short knife into the
bulls neck at the base of the horns. The first time he missed. He drove
the knife in again, and the bull went over, twitching and rigid.
Romeros brother, holding the bulls horn in one hand, the knife in the
other, looked up at the Presidents box. Handkerchiefs were waving all
over the bull-ring. The President looked down from the box and waved his
handkerchief. The brother cut the notched black ear from the dead bull
and trotted over with it to Romero. The bull lay heavy and black on the
sand, his tongue out. Boys were running toward him from all parts of the
arena, making a little circle around him. They were starting to dance
around the bull.

Romero took the ear from his brother and held it up toward the
President. The President bowed and Romero, running to get ahead of the
crowd, came toward us. He leaned up against the barrera and gave the ear
to Brett. He nodded his head and smiled. The crowd were all about him.
Brett held down the cape.

You liked it? Romero called.

Brett did not say anything. They looked at each other and smiled. Brett
had the ear in her hand.

Dont get bloody, Romero said, and grinned. The crowd wanted him.
Several boys shouted at Brett. The crowd was the boys, the dancers, and
the drunks. Romero turned and tried to get through the crowd. They were
all around him trying to lift him and put him on their shoulders. He
fought and twisted away, and started running, in the midst of them,
toward the exit. He did not want to be carried on peoples shoulders.
But they held him and lifted him. It was uncomfortable and his legs were
spraddled and his body was very sore. They were lifting him and all
running toward the gate. He had his hand on somebodys shoulder. He
looked around at us apologetically. The crowd, running, went out the
gate with him.

We all three went back to the hotel. Brett went up-stairs. Bill and I
sat in the down-stairs dining-room and ate some hard-boiled eggs and
drank several bottles of beer. Belmonte came down in his street clothes
with his manager and two other men. They sat at the next table and ate.
Belmonte ate very little. They were leaving on the seven oclock train
for Barcelona. Belmonte wore a blue-striped shirt and a dark suit, and
ate soft-boiled eggs. The others ate a big meal. Belmonte did not talk.
He only answered questions.

Bill was tired after the bull-fight. So was I. We both took a bull-fight
very hard. We sat and ate the eggs and I watched Belmonte and the people
at his table. The men with him were tough-looking and businesslike.

Come on over to the caf, Bill said. I want an absinthe.

It was the last day of the fiesta. Outside it was beginning to be cloudy
again. The square was full of people and the fireworks experts were
making up their set pieces for the night and covering them over with
beech branches. Boys were watching. We passed stands of rockets with
long bamboo stems. Outside the caf there was a great crowd. The music
and the dancing were going on. The giants and the dwarfs were passing.

Wheres Edna? I asked Bill.

I dont know.

We watched the beginning of the evening of the last night of the fiesta.
The absinthe made everything seem better. I drank it without sugar in
the dripping glass, and it was pleasantly bitter.

I feel sorry about Cohn, Bill said. He had an awful time.

Oh, to hell with Cohn, I said.

Where do you suppose he went?

Up to Paris.

What do you suppose hell do?

Oh, to hell with him.

What do you suppose hell do?

Pick up with his old girl, probably.

Who was his old girl?

Somebody named Frances.

We had another absinthe.

When do you go back? I asked.

To-morrow.

After a little while Bill said: Well, it was a swell fiesta.

Yes, I said; something doing all the time.

You wouldnt believe it. Its like a wonderful nightmare.

Sure, I said. Id believe anything. Including nightmares.

Whats the matter? Feel low?

Low as hell.

Have another absinthe. Here, waiter! Another absinthe for this seor.

I feel like hell, I said.

Drink that, said Bill. Drink it slow.

It was beginning to get dark. The fiesta was going on. I began to feel
drunk but I did not feel any better.

How do you feel?

I feel like hell.

Have another?

It wont do any good.

Try it. You cant tell; maybe this is the one that gets it. Hey,
waiter! Another absinthe for this seor!

I poured the water directly into it and stirred it instead of letting it
drip. Bill put in a lump of ice. I stirred the ice around with a spoon
in the brownish, cloudy mixture.

How is it?

Fine.

Dont drink it fast that way. It will make you sick.

I set down the glass. I had not meant to drink it fast.

I feel tight.

You ought to.

Thats what you wanted, wasnt it?

Sure. Get tight. Get over your damn depression.

Well, Im tight. Is that what you want?

Sit down.

I wont sit down, I said. Im going over to the hotel.

I was very drunk. I was drunker than I ever remembered having been. At
the hotel I went up-stairs. Bretts door was open. I put my head in the
room. Mike was sitting on the bed. He waved a bottle.

Jake, he said. Come in, Jake.

I went in and sat down. The room was unstable unless I looked at some
fixed point.

Brett, you know. Shes gone off with the bull-fighter chap.

No.

Yes. She looked for you to say good-bye. They went on the seven oclock
train.

Did they?

Bad thing to do, Mike said. She shouldnt have done it.

No.

Have a drink? Wait while I ring for some beer.

Im drunk, I said. Im going in and lie down.

Are you blind? I was blind myself.

Yes, I said, Im blind.

Well, bung-o, Mike said. Get some sleep, old Jake.

I went out the door and into my own room and lay on the bed. The bed
went sailing off and I sat up in bed and looked at the wall to make it
stop. Outside in the square the fiesta was going on. It did not mean
anything. Later Bill and Mike came in to get me to go down and eat with
them. I pretended to be asleep.

Hes asleep. Better let him alone.

Hes blind as a tick, Mike said. They went out.

I got up and went to the balcony and looked out at the dancing in the
square. The world was not wheeling any more. It was just very clear and
bright, and inclined to blur at the edges. I washed, brushed my hair. I
looked strange to myself in the glass, and went down-stairs to the
dining-room.

Here he is! said Bill. Good old Jake! I knew you wouldnt pass out.

Hello, you old drunk, Mike said.

I got hungry and woke up.

Eat some soup, Bill said.

The three of us sat at the table, and it seemed as though about six
people were missing.




                                BOOK III




                                CHAPTER
                                   19


In the morning it was all over. The fiesta was finished. I woke about
nine oclock, had a bath, dressed, and went down-stairs. The square was
empty and there were no people on the streets. A few children were
picking up rocket-sticks in the square. The cafs were just opening and
the waiters were carrying out the comfortable white wicker chairs and
arranging them around the marble-topped tables in the shade of the
arcade. They were sweeping the streets and sprinkling them with a hose.

I sat in one of the wicker chairs and leaned back comfortably. The
waiter was in no hurry to come. The white-paper announcements of the
unloading of the bulls and the big schedules of special trains were
still up on the pillars of the arcade. A waiter wearing a blue apron
came out with a bucket of water and a cloth, and commenced to tear down
the notices, pulling the paper off in strips and washing and rubbing
away the paper that stuck to the stone. The fiesta was over.

I drank a coffee and after a while Bill came over. I watched him come
walking across the square. He sat down at the table and ordered a
coffee.

Well, he said, its all over.

Yes, I said. When do you go?

I dont know. We better get a car, I think. Arent you going back to
Paris?

No. I can stay away another week. I think Ill go to San Sebastian.

I want to get back.

Whats Mike going to do?

Hes going to Saint Jean de Luz.

Lets get a car and all go as far as Bayonne. You can get the train up
from there to-night.

Good. Lets go after lunch.

All right. Ill get the car.

We had lunch and paid the bill. Montoya did not come near us. One of the
maids brought the bill. The car was outside. The chauffeur piled and
strapped the bags on top of the car and put them in beside him in the
front seat and we got in. The car went out of the square, along through
the side streets, out under the trees and down the hill and away from
Pamplona. It did not seem like a very long ride. Mike had a bottle of
Fundador. I only took a couple of drinks. We came over the mountains and
out of Spain and down the white roads and through the overfoliaged, wet,
green, Basque country, and finally into Bayonne. We left Bills baggage
at the station, and he bought a ticket to Paris. His train left at
seven-ten. We came out of the station. The car was standing out in
front.

What shall we do about the car? Bill asked.

Oh, bother the car, Mike said. Lets just keep the car with us.

All right, Bill said. Where shall we go?

Lets go to Biarritz and have a drink.

Old Mike the spender, Bill said.

We drove in to Biarritz and left the car outside a very Ritz place. We
went into the bar and sat on high stools and drank a whiskey and soda.

That drinks mine, Mike said.

Lets roll for it.

So we rolled poker dice out of a deep leather dice-cup. Bill was out
first roll. Mike lost to me and handed the bartender a hundred-franc
note. The whiskeys were twelve francs apiece. We had another round and
Mike lost again. Each time he gave the bartender a good tip. In a room
off the bar there was a good jazz band playing. It was a pleasant bar.
We had another round. I went out on the first roll with four kings. Bill
and Mike rolled. Mike won the first roll with four jacks. Bill won the
second. On the final roll Mike had three kings and let them stay. He
handed the dice-cup to Bill. Bill rattled them and rolled, and there
were three kings, an ace, and a queen.

Its yours, Mike, Bill said. Old Mike, the gambler.

Im so sorry, Mike said. I cant get it.

Whats the matter?

Ive no money, Mike said. Im stony. Ive just twenty francs. Here,
take twenty francs.

Bills face sort of changed.

I just had enough to pay Montoya. Damned lucky to have it, too.

Ill cash you a check, Bill said.

Thats damned nice of you, but you see I cant write checks.

What are you going to do for money?

Oh, some will come through. Ive two weeks allowance should be here. I
can live on tick at this pub in Saint Jean.

What do you want to do about the car? Bill asked me. Do you want to
keep it on?

It doesnt make any difference. Seems sort of idiotic.

Come on, lets have another drink, Mike said.

Fine. This one is on me, Bill said. Has Brett any money? He turned
to Mike.

I shouldnt think so. She put up most of what I gave to old Montoya.

She hasnt any money with her? I asked.

I shouldnt think so. She never has any money. She gets five hundred
quid a year and pays three hundred and fifty of it in interest to Jews.

I suppose they get it at the source, said Bill.

Quite. Theyre not really Jews. We just call them Jews. Theyre
Scotsmen, I believe.

Hasnt she any at all with her? I asked.

I hardly think so. She gave it all to me when she left.

Well, Bill said, we might as well have another drink.

Damned good idea, Mike said. One never gets anywhere by discussing
finances.

No, said Bill. Bill and I rolled for the next two rounds. Bill lost
and paid. We went out to the car.

Anywhere youd like to go, Mike? Bill asked.

Lets take a drive. It might do my credit good. Lets drive about a
little.

Fine. Id like to see the coast. Lets drive down toward Hendaye.

I havent any credit along the coast.

You cant ever tell, said Bill.

We drove out along the coast road. There was the green of the headlands,
the white, red-roofed villas, patches of forest, and the ocean very blue
with the tide out and the water curling far out along the beach. We
drove through Saint Jean de Luz and passed through villages farther down
the coast. Back of the rolling country we were going through we saw the
mountains we had come over from Pamplona. The road went on ahead. Bill
looked at his watch. It was time for us to go back. He knocked on the
glass and told the driver to turn around. The driver backed the car out
into the grass to turn it. In back of us were the woods, below a stretch
of meadow, then the sea.

At the hotel where Mike was going to stay in Saint Jean we stopped the
car and he got out. The chauffeur carried in his bags. Mike stood by the
side of the car.

Good-bye, you chaps, Mike said. It was a damned fine fiesta.

So long, Mike, Bill said.

Ill see you around, I said.

Dont worry about money, Mike said. You can pay for the car, Jake,
and Ill send you my share.

So long, Mike.

So long, you chaps. Youve been damned nice.

We all shook hands. We waved from the car to Mike. He stood in the road
watching. We got to Bayonne just before the train left. A porter carried
Bills bags in from the consigne. I went as far as the inner gate to the
tracks.

So long, fella, Bill said.

So long, kid!

It was swell. Ive had a swell time.

Will you be in Paris?

No, I have to sail on the 17th. So long, fella!

So long, old kid!

He went in through the gate to the train. The porter went ahead with the
bags. I watched the train pull out. Bill was at one of the windows. The
window passed, the rest of the train passed, and the tracks were empty.
I went outside to the car.

How much do we owe you? I asked the driver. The price to Bayonne had
been fixed at a hundred and fifty pesetas.

Two hundred pesetas.

How much more will it be if you drive me to San Sebastian on your way
back?

Fifty pesetas.

Dont kid me.

Thirty-five pesetas.

Its not worth it, I said. Drive me to the Hotel Panier Fleuri.

At the hotel I paid the driver and gave him a tip. The car was powdered
with dust. I rubbed the rod-case through the dust. It seemed the last
thing that connected me with Spain and the fiesta. The driver put the
car in gear and went down the street. I watched it turn off to take the
road to Spain. I went into the hotel and they gave me a room. It was the
same room I had slept in when Bill and Cohn and I were in Bayonne. That
seemed a very long time ago. I washed, changed my shirt, and went out in
the town.

At a newspaper kiosque I bought a copy of the New York _Herald_ and sat
in a caf to read it. It felt strange to be in France again. There was a
safe, suburban feeling. I wished I had gone up to Paris with Bill,
except that Paris would have meant more fiesta-ing. I was through with
fiestas for a while. It would be quiet in San Sebastian. The season does
not open there until August. I could get a good hotel room and read and
swim. There was a fine beach there. There were wonderful trees along the
promenade above the beach, and there were many children sent down with
their nurses before the season opened. In the evening there would be
band concerts under the trees across from the Caf Marinas. I could sit
in the Marinas and listen.

How does one eat inside? I asked the waiter. Inside the caf was a
restaurant.

Well. Very well. One eats very well.

Good.

I went in and ate dinner. It was a big meal for France but it seemed
very carefully apportioned after Spain. I drank a bottle of wine for
company. It was a Chteau Margaux. It was pleasant to be drinking slowly
and to be tasting the wine and to be drinking alone. A bottle of wine
was good company. Afterward I had coffee. The waiter recommended a
Basque liqueur called Izzarra. He brought in the bottle and poured a
liqueur-glass full. He said Izzarra was made of the flowers of the
Pyrenees. The veritable flowers of the Pyrenees. It looked like hair-oil
and smelled like Italian _strega_. I told him to take the flowers of the
Pyrenees away and bring me a _vieux marc_. The _marc_ was good. I had a
second _marc_ after the coffee.

The waiter seemed a little offended about the flowers of the Pyrenees,
so I overtipped him. That made him happy. It felt comfortable to be in a
country where it is so simple to make people happy. You can never tell
whether a Spanish waiter will thank you. Everything is on such a clear
financial basis in France. It is the simplest country to live in. No one
makes things complicated by becoming your friend for any obscure reason.
If you want people to like you you have only to spend a little money. I
spent a little money and the waiter liked me. He appreciated my valuable
qualities. He would be glad to see me back. I would dine there again
some time and he would be glad to see me, and would want me at his
table. It would be a sincere liking because it would have a sound basis.
I was back in France.

Next morning I tipped every one a little too much at the hotel to make
more friends, and left on the morning train for San Sebastian. At the
station I did not tip the porter more than I should because I did not
think I would ever see him again. I only wanted a few good French
friends in Bayonne to make me welcome in case I should come back there
again. I knew that if they remembered me their friendship would be
loyal.

At Irun we had to change trains and show passports. I hated to leave
France. Life was so simple in France. I felt I was a fool to be going
back into Spain. In Spain you could not tell about anything. I felt like
a fool to be going back into it, but I stood in line with my passport,
opened my bags for the customs, bought a ticket, went through a gate,
climbed onto the train, and after forty minutes and eight tunnels I was
at San Sebastian.

Even on a hot day San Sebastian has a certain early-morning quality. The
trees seem as though their leaves were never quite dry. The streets feel
as though they had just been sprinkled. It is always cool and shady on
certain streets on the hottest day. I went to a hotel in the town where
I had stopped before, and they gave me a room with a balcony that opened
out above the roofs of the town. There was a green mountainside beyond
the roofs.

I unpacked my bags and stacked my books on the table beside the head of
the bed, put out my shaving things, hung up some clothes in the big
armoire, and made up a bundle for the laundry. Then I took a shower in
the bathroom and went down to lunch. Spain had not changed to
summer-time, so I was early. I set my watch again. I had recovered an
hour by coming to San Sebastian.

As I went into the dining-room the concierge brought me a police
bulletin to fill out. I signed it and asked him for two telegraph forms,
and wrote a message to the Hotel Montoya, telling them to forward all
mail and telegrams for me to this address. I calculated how many days I
would be in San Sebastian and then wrote out a wire to the office asking
them to hold mail, but forward all wires for me to San Sebastian for six
days. Then I went in and had lunch.

After lunch I went up to my room, read a while, and went to sleep. When
I woke it was half past four. I found my swimming-suit, wrapped it with
a comb in a towel, and went down-stairs and walked up the street to the
Concha. The tide was about half-way out. The beach was smooth and firm,
and the sand yellow. I went into a bathing-cabin, undressed, put on my
suit, and walked across the smooth sand to the sea. The sand was warm
under bare feet. There were quite a few people in the water and on the
beach. Out beyond where the headlands of the Concha almost met to form
the harbor there was a white line of breakers and the open sea. Although
the tide was going out, there were a few slow rollers. They came in like
undulations in the water, gathered weight of water, and then broke
smoothly on the warm sand. I waded out. The water was cold. As a roller
came I dove, swam out under water, and came to the surface with all the
chill gone. I swam out to the raft, pulled myself up, and lay on the hot
planks. A boy and girl were at the other end. The girl had undone the
top strap of her bathing-suit and was browning her back. The boy lay
face downward on the raft and talked to her. She laughed at things he
said, and turned her brown back in the sun. I lay on the raft in the sun
until I was dry. Then I tried several dives. I dove deep once, swimming
down to the bottom. I swam with my eyes open and it was green and dark.
The raft made a dark shadow. I came out of water beside the raft, pulled
up, dove once more, holding it for length, and then swam ashore. I lay
on the beach until I was dry, then went into the bathing-cabin, took off
my suit, sloshed myself with fresh water, and rubbed dry.

I walked around the harbor under the trees to the casino, and then up
one of the cool streets to the Caf Marinas. There was an orchestra
playing inside the caf and I sat out on the terrace and enjoyed the
fresh coolness in the hot day, and had a glass of lemon-juice and shaved
ice and then a long whiskey and soda. I sat in front of the Marinas for
a long time and read and watched the people, and listened to the music.

Later when it began to get dark, I walked around the harbor and out
along the promenade, and finally back to the hotel for supper. There was
a bicycle-race on, the Tour du Pays Basque, and the riders were stopping
that night in San Sebastian. In the dining-room, at one side, there was
a long table of bicycle-riders, eating with their trainers and managers.
They were all French and Belgians, and paid close attention to their
meal, but they were having a good time. At the head of the table were
two good-looking French girls, with much Rue du Faubourg Montmartre
chic. I could not make out whom they belonged to. They all spoke in
slang at the long table and there were many private jokes and some jokes
at the far end that were not repeated when the girls asked to hear them.
The next morning at five oclock the race resumed with the last lap, San
Sebastian-Bilbao. The bicycle-riders drank much wine, and were burned
and browned by the sun. They did not take the race seriously except
among themselves. They had raced among themselves so often that it did
not make much difference who won. Especially in a foreign country. The
money could be arranged.

The man who had a matter of two minutes lead in the race had an attack
of boils, which were very painful. He sat on the small of his back. His
neck was very red and the blond hairs were sunburned. The other riders
joked him about his boils. He tapped on the table with his fork.

Listen, he said, to-morrow my nose is so tight on the handle-bars
that the only thing touches those boils is a lovely breeze.

One of the girls looked at him down the table, and he grinned and turned
red. The Spaniards, they said, did not know how to pedal.

I had coffee out on the terrasse with the team manager of one of the big
bicycle manufacturers. He said it had been a very pleasant race, and
would have been worth watching if Bottechia had not abandoned it at
Pamplona. The dust had been bad, but in Spain the roads were better than
in France. Bicycle road-racing was the only sport in the world, he said.
Had I ever followed the Tour de France? Only in the papers. The Tour de
France was the greatest sporting event in the world. Following and
organizing the road races had made him know France. Few people know
France. All spring and all summer and all fall he spent on the road with
bicycle road-racers. Look at the number of motor-cars now that followed
the riders from town to town in a road race. It was a rich country and
more _sportif_ every year. It would be the most _sportif_ country in the
world. It was bicycle road-racing did it. That and football. He knew
France. _La France Sportive._ He knew road-racing. We had a cognac.
After all, though, it wasnt bad to get back to Paris. There is only one
Paname. In all the world, that is. Paris is the town the most _sportif_
in the world. Did I know the _Chope de Negre_? Did I not. I would see
him there some time. I certainly would. We would drink another _fine_
together. We certainly would. They started at six oclock less a quarter
in the morning. Would I be up for the depart? I would certainly try to.
Would I like him to call me? It was very interesting. I would leave a
call at the desk. He would not mind calling me. I could not let him take
the trouble. I would leave a call at the desk. We said good-bye until
the next morning.

In the morning when I awoke the bicycle-riders and their following cars
had been on the road for three hours. I had coffee and the papers in bed
and then dressed and took my bathing-suit down to the beach. Everything
was fresh and cool and damp in the early morning. Nurses in uniform and
in peasant costume walked under the trees with children. The Spanish
children were beautiful. Some bootblacks sat together under a tree
talking to a soldier. The soldier had only one arm. The tide was in and
there was a good breeze and a surf on the beach.

I undressed in one of the bath-cabins, crossed the narrow line of beach
and went into the water. I swam out, trying to swim through the rollers,
but having to dive sometimes. Then in the quiet water I turned and
floated. Floating I saw only the sky, and felt the drop and lift of the
swells. I swam back to the surf and coasted in, face down, on a big
roller, then turned and swam, trying to keep in the trough and not have
a wave break over me. It made me tired, swimming in the trough, and I
turned and swam out to the raft. The water was buoyant and cold. It felt
as though you could never sink. I swam slowly, it seemed like a long
swim with the high tide, and then pulled up on the raft and sat,
dripping, on the boards that were becoming hot in the sun. I looked
around at the bay, the old town, the casino, the line of trees along the
promenade, and the big hotels with their white porches and gold-lettered
names. Off on the right, almost closing the harbor, was a green hill
with a castle. The raft rocked with the motion of the water. On the
other side of the narrow gap that led into the open sea was another high
headland. I thought I would like to swim across the bay but I was afraid
of cramp.

I sat in the sun and watched the bathers on the beach. They looked very
small. After a while I stood up, gripped with my toes on the edge of the
raft as it tipped with my weight, and dove cleanly and deeply, to come
up through the lightening water, blew the salt water out of my head, and
swam slowly and steadily in to shore.

After I was dressed and had paid for the bath-cabin, I walked back to
the hotel. The bicycle-racers had left several copies of _LAuto_
around, and I gathered them up in the reading-room and took them out and
sat in an easy chair in the sun to read about and catch up on French
sporting life. While I was sitting there the concierge came out with a
blue envelope in his hand.

A telegram for you, sir.

I poked my finger along under the fold that was fastened down, spread it
open, and read it. It had been forwarded from Paris:

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

I tipped the concierge and read the message again. A postman was coming
along the sidewalk. He turned in the hotel. He had a big moustache and
looked very military. He came out of the hotel again. The concierge was
just behind him.

Heres another telegram for you, sir.

Thank you, I said.

I opened it. It was forwarded from Pamplona.

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

The concierge stood there waiting for another tip, probably.

What time is there a train for Madrid?

It left at nine this morning. There is a slow train at eleven, and the
Sud Express at ten to-night.

Get me a berth on the Sud Express. Do you want the money now?

Just as you wish, he said. I will have it put on the bill.

Do that.

Well, that meant San Sebastian all shot to hell. I suppose, vaguely, I
had expected something of the sort. I saw the concierge standing in the
doorway.

Bring me a telegram form, please.

He brought it and I took out my fountain-pen and printed:

                   LADY ASHLEY HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                   ARRIVING SUD EXPRESS TOMORROW LOVE
                   JAKE.

That seemed to handle it. That was it. Send a girl off with one man.
Introduce her to another to go off with him. Now go and bring her back.
And sign the wire with love. That was it all right. I went in to lunch.

I did not sleep much that night on the Sud Express. In the morning I had
breakfast in the dining-car and watched the rock and pine country
between Avila and Escorial. I saw the Escorial out of the window, gray
and long and cold in the sun, and did not give a damn about it. I saw
Madrid come up over the plain, a compact white sky-line on the top of a
little cliff away off across the sun-hardened country.

The Norte station in Madrid is the end of the line. All trains finish
there. They dont go on anywhere. Outside were cabs and taxis and a line
of hotel runners. It was like a country town. I took a taxi and we
climbed up through the gardens, by the empty palace and the unfinished
church on the edge of the cliff, and on up until we were in the high,
hot, modern town. The taxi coasted down a smooth street to the Puerta
del Sol, and then through the traffic and out into the Carrera San
Jeronimo. All the shops had their awnings down against the heat. The
windows on the sunny side of the street were shuttered. The taxi stopped
at the curb. I saw the sign HOTEL MONTANA on the second floor. The
taxi-driver carried the bags in and left them by the elevator. I could
not make the elevator work, so I walked up. On the second floor up was a
cut brass sign: HOTEL MONTANA. I rang and no one came to the door. I
rang again and a maid with a sullen face opened the door.

Is Lady Ashley here? I asked.

She looked at me dully.

Is an Englishwoman here?

She turned and called some one inside. A very fat woman came to the
door. Her hair was gray and stiffly oiled in scallops around her face.
She was short and commanding.

Muy buenos, I said. Is there an Englishwoman here? I would like to
see this English lady.

Muy buenos. Yes, there is a female English. Certainly you can see her
if she wishes to see you.

She wishes to see me.

The chica will ask her.

It is very hot.

It is very hot in the summer in Madrid.

And how cold in winter.

Yes, it is very cold in winter.

Did I want to stay myself in person in the Hotel Montana?

Of that as yet I was undecided, but it would give me pleasure if my bags
were brought up from the ground floor in order that they might not be
stolen. Nothing was ever stolen in the Hotel Montana. In other fondas,
yes. Not here. No. The personages of this establishment were rigidly
selectioned. I was happy to hear it. Nevertheless I would welcome the
upbringal of my bags.

The maid came in and said that the female English wanted to see the male
English now, at once.

Good, I said. You see. It is as I said.

Clearly.

I followed the maids back down a long, dark corridor. At the end she
knocked on a door.

Hello, said Brett. Is it you, Jake?

Its me.

Come in. Come in.

I opened the door. The maid closed it after me. Brett was in bed. She
had just been brushing her hair and held the brush in her hand. The room
was in that disorder produced only by those who have always had
servants.

Darling! Brett said.

I went over to the bed and put my arms around her. She kissed me, and
while she kissed me I could feel she was thinking of something else. She
was trembling in my arms. She felt very small.

Darling! Ive had such a hell of a time.

Tell me about it.

Nothing to tell. He only left yesterday. I made him go.

Why didnt you keep him?

I dont know. It isnt the sort of thing one does. I dont think I hurt
him any.

You were probably damn good for him.

He shouldnt be living with any one. I realized that right away.

No.

Oh, hell! she said, lets not talk about it. Lets never talk about
it.

All right.

It was rather a knock his being ashamed of me. He was ashamed of me for
a while, you know.

No.

Oh, yes. They ragged him about me at the caf, I guess. He wanted me to
grow my hair out. Me, with long hair. Id look so like hell.

Its funny.

He said it would make me more womanly. Id look a fright.

What happened?

Oh, he got over that. He wasnt ashamed of me long.

What was it about being in trouble?

I didnt know whether I could make him go, and I didnt have a sou to
go away and leave him. He tried to give me a lot of money, you know. I
told him I had scads of it. He knew that was a lie. I couldnt take his
money, you know.

No.

Oh, lets not talk about it. There were some funny things, though. Do
give me a cigarette.

I lit the cigarette.

He learned his English as a waiter in Gib.

Yes.

He wanted to marry me, finally.

Really?

Of course. I cant even marry Mike.

Maybe he thought that would make him Lord Ashley.

No. It wasnt that. He really wanted to marry me. So I couldnt go away
from him, he said. He wanted to make it sure I could never go away from
him. After Id gotten more womanly, of course.

You ought to feel set up.

I do. Im all right again. Hes wiped out that damned Cohn.

Good.

You know Id have lived with him if I hadnt seen it was bad for him.
We got along damned well.

Outside of your personal appearance.

Oh, hed have gotten used to that.

She put out the cigarette.

Im thirty-four, you know. Im not going to be one of these bitches
that ruins children.

No.

Im not going to be that way. I feel rather good, you know. I feel
rather set up.

Good.

She looked away. I thought she was looking for another cigarette. Then I
saw she was crying. I could feel her crying. Shaking and crying. She
wouldnt look up. I put my arms around her.

Dont lets ever talk about it. Please dont lets ever talk about it.

Dear Brett.

Im going back to Mike. I could feel her crying as I held her close.
Hes so damned nice and hes so awful. Hes my sort of thing.

She would not look up. I stroked her hair. I could feel her shaking.

I wont be one of those bitches, she said. But, oh, Jake, please
lets never talk about it.

We left the Hotel Montana. The woman who ran the hotel would not let me
pay the bill. The bill had been paid.

Oh, well. Let it go, Brett said. It doesnt matter now.

We rode in a taxi down to the Palace Hotel, left the bags, arranged for
berths on the Sud Express for the night, and went into the bar of the
hotel for a cocktail. We sat on high stools at the bar while the barman
shook the Martinis in a large nickelled shaker.

Its funny what a wonderful gentility you get in the bar of a big
hotel, I said.

Barmen and jockeys are the only people who are polite any more.

No matter how vulgar a hotel is, the bar is always nice.

Its odd.

Bartenders have always been fine.

You know, Brett said, its quite true. He is only nineteen. Isnt it
amazing?

We touched the two glasses as they stood side by side on the bar. They
were coldly beaded. Outside the curtained window was the summer heat of
Madrid.

I like an olive in a Martini, I said to the barman.

Right you are, sir. There you are.

Thanks.

I should have asked, you know.

The barman went far enough up the bar so that he would not hear our
conversation. Brett had sipped from the Martini as it stood, on the
wood. Then she picked it up. Her hand was steady enough to lift it after
that first sip.

Its good. Isnt it a nice bar?

Theyre all nice bars.

You know I didnt believe it at first. He was born in 1905. I was in
school in Paris, then. Think of that.

Anything you want me to think about it?

Dont be an ass. _Would_ you buy a lady a drink?

Well have two more Martinis.

As they were before, sir?

They were very good. Brett smiled at him.

Thank you, maam.

Well, bung-o, Brett said.

Bung-o!

You know, Brett said, hed only been with two women before. He never
cared about anything but bull-fighting.

Hes got plenty of time.

I dont know. He thinks it was me. Not the show in general.

Well, it was you.

Yes. It was me.

I thought you werent going to ever talk about it.

How can I help it?

Youll lose it if you talk about it.

I just talk around it. You know I feel rather damned good, Jake.

You should.

You know it makes one feel rather good deciding not to be a bitch.

Yes.

Its sort of what we have instead of God.

Some people have God, I said. Quite a lot.

He never worked very well with me.

Should we have another Martini?

The barman shook up two more Martinis and poured them out into fresh
glasses.

Where will we have lunch? I asked Brett. The bar was cool. You could
feel the heat outside through the window.

Here? asked Brett.

Its rotten here in the hotel. Do you know a place called Botins? I
asked the barman.

Yes, sir. Would you like to have me write out the address?

Thank you.

We lunched up-stairs at Botins. It is one of the best restaurants in
the world. We had roast young suckling pig and drank _rioja_ _alta_.
Brett did not eat much. She never ate much. I ate a very big meal and
drank three bottles of _rioja alta_.

How do you feel, Jake? Brett asked. My God! what a meal youve
eaten.

I feel fine. Do you want a dessert?

Lord, no.

Brett was smoking.

You like to eat, dont you? she said.

Yes. I said. I like to do a lot of things.

What do you like to do?

Oh, I said, I like to do a lot of things. Dont you want a dessert?

You asked me that once, Brett said.

Yes, I said. So I did. Lets have another bottle of _rioja alta_.

Its very good.

You havent drunk much of it, I said.

I have. You havent seen.

Lets get two bottles, I said. The bottles came. I poured a little in
my glass, then a glass for Brett, then filled my glass. We touched
glasses.

Bung-o! Brett said. I drank my glass and poured out another. Brett put
her hand on my arm.

Dont get drunk, Jake, she said. You dont have to.

How do you know?

Dont, she said. Youll be all right.

Im not getting drunk, I said. Im just drinking a little wine. I
like to drink wine.

Dont get drunk, she said. Jake, dont get drunk.

Want to go for a ride? I said. Want to ride through the town?

Right, Brett said. I havent seen Madrid. I should see Madrid.

Ill finish this, I said.

Down-stairs we came out through the first-floor dining-room to the
street. A waiter went for a taxi. It was hot and bright. Up the street
was a little square with trees and grass where there were taxis parked.
A taxi came up the street, the waiter hanging out at the side. I tipped
him and told the driver where to drive, and got in beside Brett. The
driver started up the street. I settled back. Brett moved close to me.
We sat close against each other. I put my arm around her and she rested
against me comfortably. It was very hot and bright, and the houses
looked sharply white. We turned out onto the Gran Via.

Oh, Jake, Brett said, we could have had such a damned good time
together.

Ahead was a mounted policeman in khaki directing traffic. He raised his
baton. The car slowed suddenly pressing Brett against me.

Yes, I said. Isnt it pretty to think so?

                                THE END




